
21 CFR Part 807 Subpart E - Premarket Notification Procedures
=============================================================


§ 807.81 When a premarket notification submission is required.
--------------------------------------------------------------

(a) Except as provided in paragraph (b) of this section, each person who is required to
register his establishment pursuant to § 807.20 must submit a premarket notification
submission to the Food and Drug Administration at least 90 days before he proposes to begin
the introduction or delivery for introduction into interstate commerce for commercial
distribution of a device intended for human use which meets any of the following criteria:

(1) The device is being introduced into commercial distribution for the first time; that is,
the device is not of the same type as, or is not substantially equivalent to, (i) a device
in commercial distribution before May 28, 1976, or (ii) a device introduced for commercial
distribution after May 28, 1976, that has subsequently been reclassified into class I or II.

(2) The device is being introduced into commercial distribution for the first time by a
person required to register, whether or not the device meets the criteria in paragraph
(a)(1) of this section.

(3) The device is one that the person currently has in commercial distribution or is
reintroducing into commercial distribution, but that is about to be significantly changed or
modified in design, components, method of manufacture, or intended use. The following
constitute significant changes or modifications that require a premarket notification:

(i) A change or modification in the device that could significantly affect the safety or
effectiveness of the device, e.g., a significant change or modification in design, material,
chemical composition, energy source, or manufacturing process.

(ii) A major change or modification in the intended use of the device.

(b)(1) A premarket notification under this subpart is not required for a device for which:

(i) A premarket approval application under section 515 of the act, or for which a petition
to reclassify under section 513(f)(2) of the act, is pending before the Food and Drug
Administration, or

(ii) There is a predetermined change control plan (PCCP) cleared under section 515C of the
act, provided that the change is consistent with the PCCP.

(2) The appropriate FDA Center Director may determine that the submission and grant of a
written request for an exception or alternative under § 801.128 or § 809.11 of this chapter
satisfies the requirement in paragraph (a)(3) of this section.

(c) In addition to complying with the requirements of this part, owners or operators of
device establishments that manufacture radiation-emitting electronic products, as defined in
§ 1000.3 of this chapter, shall comply with the reporting requirements of part 1002 of this
chapter.


----------------------------------------------------------------------


§ 807.87 Information required in a premarket notification submission.
---------------------------------------------------------------------

Each premarket notification submission shall contain the following information:

(a) The device name, including both the trade or proprietary name and the common or usual
name or classification name of the device.

(b) The establishment registration number, if applicable, of the owner or operator
submitting the premarket notification submission.

(c) The class in which the device has been put under section 513 of the act and, if known,
its appropriate panel; or, if the owner or operator determines that the device has not been
classified under such section, a statement of that determination and the basis for the
person's determination that the device is not so classified.

(d) Action taken by the person required to register to comply with the requirements of the
act under section 514 for performance standards.

(e) Proposed labels, labeling, and advertisements sufficient to describe the device, its
intended use, and the directions for its use. Where applicable, photographs or engineering
drawings should be supplied.

(f) A statement indicating the device is similar to and/or different from other products of
comparable type in commercial distribution, accompanied by data to support the statement.
This information may include an identification of similar products, materials, design
considerations, energy expected to be used or delivered by the device, and a description of
the operational principles of the device.

(g) Where a person required to register intends to introduce into commercial distribution a
device that has undergone a significant change or modification that could significantly
affect the safety or effectiveness of the device, or the device is to be marketed for a new
or different indication for use, the premarket notification submission must include
appropriate supporting data to show that the manufacturer has considered what consequences
and effects the change or modification or new use might have on the safety and effectiveness
of the device.

(h) A 510(k) summary as described in § 807.92 or a 510(k) statement as described in §
807.93.

(i) A financial certification or disclosure statement or both, as required by part 54 of
this chapter.

(j) For a submission supported by clinical data:

(1) If the data are from clinical investigations conducted in the United States, a statement
that each investigation was conducted in compliance with applicable requirements in the
protection of human subjects regulations in part 50 of this chapter, the institutional
review boards regulations in part 56 of this chapter, or was not subject to the regulations
under § 56.104 or § 56.105, and the investigational device exemptions regulations in part
812 of this chapter, or if the investigation was not conducted in compliance with those
regulations, a brief statement of the reason for the noncompliance.

(2) If the data are from clinical investigations conducted outside the United States, the
requirements under § 812.28 of this chapter apply. If any such investigation was not
conducted in accordance with good clinical practice (GCP) as described in § 812.28(a) of
this chapter, include either a waiver request in accordance with § 812.28(c) of the chapter
or a brief statement of the reason for not conducting the investigation in accordance with
GCP and a description of steps taken to ensure that the data and results are credible and
accurate and that the rights, safety, and well-being of subjects have been adequately
protected.

(k) For submissions claiming substantial equivalence to a device which has been classified
into class III under section 513(b) of the act:

(1) Which was introduced or delivered for introduction into interstate commerce for
commercial distribution before December 1, 1990; and

(2) For which no final regulation requiring premarket approval has been issued under section
515(b) of the act, a summary of the types of safety and effectiveness problems associated
with the type of devices being compared and a citation to the information upon which the
summary is based (class III summary). The 510(k) submitter shall also certify that a
reasonable search of all information known or otherwise available about the class III device
and other similar legally marketed devices has been conducted (class III certification), as
described in § 807.94. This information does not refer to information that already has been
submitted to the Food and Drug Administration (FDA) under section 519 of the act. FDA may
require the submission of the adverse safety and effectiveness data described in the class
III summary or citation.

(l) A statement that the submitter believes, to the best of his or her knowledge, that all
data and information submitted in the premarket notification are truthful and accurate and
that no material fact has been omitted.

(m) Any additional information regarding the device requested by the Commissioner that is
necessary for the Commissioner to make a finding as to whether or not the device is
substantially equivalent to a device in commercial distribution. A request for additional
information will advise the owner or operator that there is insufficient information
contained in the original premarket notification submission for the Commissioner to make
this determination and that the owner or operator may either submit the requested data or a
new premarket notification containing the requested information at least 90 days before the
owner or operator intends to market the device, or submit a premarket approval application
in accordance with section 515 of the act. If the additional information is not submitted
within 30 days following the date of the request, the Commissioner will consider the
premarket notification to be withdrawn.


----------------------------------------------------------------------


§ 807.90 Format of a premarket notification submission.
-------------------------------------------------------

Each premarket notification submission pursuant to this part shall be submitted in
accordance with this section. Each submission shall:

(a)(1) For devices regulated by the Center for Devices and Radiological Health, be addressed
to the current address displayed on the website https://www.fda.gov/cdrhsubmissionaddress.

(2) For devices regulated by the Center for Biologics Evaluation and Research, be addressed
to the current address displayed on the website https://www.fda.gov/AboutFDA/CentersOffices/
OfficeofMedicalProductsandTobacco/CBER/ucm385240.htm; or for devices regulated by the Center
for Drug Evaluation and Research, be addressed to the Central Document Room, Center for Drug
Evaluation and Research, Food and Drug Administration, 5901-B Ammendale Rd., Beltsville, MD
20705-1266. Information about devices regulated by the Center for Biologics Evaluation and
Research is available at
https://www.fda.gov/BiologicsBloodVaccines/BloodBloodProducts/ApprovedProducts/default.htm.

(3) All inquiries regarding a premarket notification submission should be sent to the
address in this section or one of the current addresses displayed on the Food and Drug
Administration's website.

(b) [Reserved]

(c) Be submitted as a single version in electronic format.

(d) Be submitted separately for each product the manufacturer intends to market.

(e) Designated “510(k) Notification” in the cover letter.


----------------------------------------------------------------------


§ 807.92 Content and format of a 510(k) summary.
------------------------------------------------

(a) A 510(k) summary shall be in sufficient detail to provide an understanding of the basis
for a determination of substantial equivalence. FDA will accept summaries as well as
amendments thereto until such time as FDA issues a determination of substantial equivalence.
All 510(k) summaries shall contain the following information:

(1) The submitter's name, address, telephone number, a contact person, and the date the
summary was prepared;

(2) The name of the device, including the trade or proprietary name if applicable, the
common or usual name, and the classification name, if known;

(3) An identification of the legally marketed device to which the submitter claims
equivalence. A legally marketed device to which a new device may be compared for a
determination regarding substantial equivalence is a device that was legally marketed prior
to May 28, 1976, or a device which has been reclassified from class III to class II or I
(the predicate), or a device which has been found to be substantially equivalent through the
510(k) premarket notification process;

(4) A description of the device that is the subject of the premarket notification
submission, such as might be found in the labeling or promotional material for the device,
including an explanation of how the device functions, the scientific concepts that form the
basis for the device, and the significant physical and performance characteristics of the
device, such as device design, material used, and physical properties;

(5) A statement of the intended use of the device that is the subject of the premarket
notification submission, including a general description of the diseases or conditions that
the device will diagnose, treat, prevent, cure, or mitigate, including a description, where
appropriate, of the patient population for which the device is intended. If the indication
statements are different from those of the legally marketed device identified in paragraph
(a)(3) of this section, the 510(k) summary shall contain an explanation as to why the
differences are not critical to the intended therapeutic, diagnostic, prosthetic, or
surgical use of the device, and why the differences do not affect the safety and
effectiveness of the device when used as labeled; and

(6) If the device has the same technological characteristics (i.e., design, material,
chemical composition, energy source) as the predicate device identified in paragraph (a)(3)
of this section, a summary of the technological characteristics of the new device in
comparison to those of the predicate device. If the device has different technological
characteristics from the predicate device, a summary of how the technological
characteristics of the device compare to a legally marketed device identified in paragraph
(a)(3) of this section.

(b) 510(k) summaries for those premarket submissions in which a determination of substantial
equivalence is also based on an assessment of performance data shall contain the following
information:

(1) A brief discussion of the nonclinical tests submitted, referenced, or relied on in the
premarket notification submission for a determination of substantial equivalence;

(2) A brief discussion of the clinical tests submitted, referenced, or relied on in the
premarket notification submission for a determination of substantial equivalence. This
discussion shall include, where applicable, a description of the subjects upon whom the
device was tested, a discussion of the safety or effectiveness data obtained from the
testing, with specific reference to adverse effects and complications, and any other
information from the clinical testing relevant to a determination of substantial
equivalence; and

(3) The conclusions drawn from the nonclinical and clinical tests that demonstrate that the
device is as safe, as effective, and performs as well as or better than the legally marketed
device identified in paragraph (a)(3) of this section.

(c) The summary should be in a separate section of the submission, beginning on a new page
and ending on a page not shared with any other section of the premarket notification
submission, and should be clearly identified as a “510(k) summary.”

(d) Any other information reasonably deemed necessary by the agency.


----------------------------------------------------------------------


§ 807.93 Content and format of a 510(k) statement.
--------------------------------------------------

(a)(1) A 510(k) statement submitted as part of a premarket notification shall state as
follows:

I certify that, in my capacity as (the position held in company by person required to submit
the premarket notification, preferably the official correspondent in the firm), of (company
name), I will make available all information included in this premarket notification on
safety and effectiveness within 30 days of request by any person if the device described in
the premarket notification submission is determined to be substantially equivalent. The
information I agree to make available will be a duplicate of the premarket notification
submission, including any adverse safety and effectiveness information, but excluding all
patient identifiers, and trade secret and confidential commercial information, as defined in
21 CFR 20.61.

(2) The statement in paragraph (a)(1) of this section should be signed by the certifier,
made on a separate page of the premarket notification submission, and clearly identified as
“510(k) statement.”

(b) All requests for information included in paragraph (a) of this section shall be made in
writing to the certifier, whose name will be published by FDA on the list of premarket
notification submissions for which substantial equivalence determinations have been made.

(c) The information provided to requestors will be a duplicate of the premarket notification
submission, including any adverse information, but excluding all patient identifiers, and
trade secret and confidential commercial information as defined in § 20.61 of this chapter.


----------------------------------------------------------------------


§ 807.97 Misbranding by reference to premarket notification.
------------------------------------------------------------

Submission of a premarket notification in accordance with this subpart, and a subsequent
determination by the Commissioner that the device intended for introduction into commercial
distribution is substantially equivalent to a device in commercial distribution before May
28, 1976, or is substantially equivalent to a device introduced into commercial distribution
after May 28, 1976, that has subsequently been reclassified into class I or II, does not in
any way denote official approval of the device. Any representation that creates an
impression of official approval of a device because of complying with the premarket
notification regulations is misleading and constitutes misbranding.


----------------------------------------------------------------------


§ 807.100 FDA action on a premarket notification.
-------------------------------------------------

(a) After review of a premarket notification, FDA will:

(1) Issue an order declaring the device to be substantially equivalent to a legally marketed
predicate device;

(2) Issue an order declaring the device to be not substantially equivalent to any legally
marketed predicate device;

(3) Request additional information; or

(4) Withhold the decision until a certification or disclosure statement is submitted to FDA
under part 54 of this chapter.

(5) Advise the applicant that the premarket notification is not required. Until the
applicant receives an order declaring a device substantially equivalent, the applicant may
not proceed to market the device.

(b) FDA will determine that a device is substantially equivalent to a predicate device using
the following criteria:

(1) The device has the same intended use as the predicate device; and

(2) The device:

(i) Has the same technological characteristics as the predicate device; or

(ii)(A) Has different technological characteristics, such as a significant change in the
materials, design, energy source, or other features of the device from those of the
predicate device;

(B) The data submitted establishes that the device is substantially equivalent to the
predicate device and contains information, including clinical data if deemed necessary by
the Commissioner, that demonstrates that the device is as safe and as effective as a legally
marketed device; and

(C) Does not raise different questions of safety and effectiveness than the predicate
device.

(3) The predicate device has not been removed from the market at the initiative of the
Commissioner of Food and Drugs or has not been determined to be misbranded or adulterated by
a judicial order.
