
--- page 1 ---
Contains Nonbinding Recommendations 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Deciding When to Submit a 510(k) for 
a Change to an Existing Device 
 
Guidance for Industry and  
Food and Drug Administration Staff  
This guidance represents the current thinking of the Food and Drug Administration (FDA or 
Agency) on this topic. It does not establish any rights for any person and is not binding on 
FDA or the public. You can use an alternative approach if it satisfies the requirements of the 
applicable statutes and regulations. To discuss an alternative approach, contact the FDA staff 
or Office responsible for this guidance as listed on the title page.  
I. Introduction 
Almost from the enactment of the Medical Device Amendments to the Federal Food, Drug, and 
Cosmetic Act (the FD&C Act) in 1976, the Food and Drug Administration (FDA or the Agency) 
has attempted to define with greater clarity when a change in a medical device would trigger the 
requirement that a manufacturer submit a new premarket notification (510(k)) to the Agency.   
This document supersedes FDA’s guidance Deciding When to Submit a 510(k) for a Change to 
an Existing Device (K97-1), issued on January 10, 1997. This guidance is not intended to 
implement significant policy changes to FDA’s current thinking on when submission of a new 
510(k) is required. Rather, the intent of this guidance is to enhance the predictability, 
consistency, and transparency of the “when to submit” decision-making process by providing a 
least burdensome approach, and describing in greater detail the regulatory framework, policies, 
and practices underlying such a decision.  
F
or the current edition of the FDA-recognized standards referenced in this document, see the 
FDA Recognized Consensus Standards Database at 
http://www.accessdata.fda.gov/scripts/cdrh/cfdocs/cfStandards/search.cfm
. 
F
DA’s guidance documents, including this guidance, do not establish legally enforceable 
responsibilities. Instead, guidances describe the Agency’s current thinking on a topic and should 
be viewed only as recommendations, unless specific regulatory or statutory requirements are 
cited. The use of the word should in Agency guidance means that something is suggested or 
recommended, but not required. 
 4 
--- page 2 ---
Contains Nonbinding Recommendations 
 
II. Background 
The regulatory criteria in 21 CFR 807.81(a)(3) state that a premarket notification must be 
submitted when: 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
(
3) The device is one that the person currently has in commercial distribution or is 
reintroducing into commercial distribution, but that is about to be significantly changed 
or modified in design, components, method of manufacture, or intended use. The 
following constitute significant changes or modifications that require a premarket 
notification:  
(i) A change or modification in the device that could significantly affect the safety 
or effectiveness of the device, e.g., a significant change or modification in design, 
material, chemical composition, energy source, or manufacturing process.  
(ii) A major change or modification in the intended use of the device.
 
F
DA issued the original guidance Deciding When to Submit a 510(k) for a Change to an Existing 
Device (K97-1) on January 10, 1997 to provide guidance on this regulatory language. As stated 
in that guidance, the key issue in the interpretation of 21 CFR 807.81(a)(3) is that the phrase 
“could significantly affect the safety or effectiveness of the device” and the use of the adjectives 
"major" and "significant" sometimes lead FDA and device manufacturers to different 
interpretations. The original guidance provided the Agency’s interpretation of these terms, with 
principles and points for manufacturers to consider in analyzing how changes in devices may 
affect safety or effectiveness and determining whether a new 510(k) must be submitted for a 
particular type of change. The current guidance preserves the basic format and content of the 
original, with updates to add clarity. The added clarity is intended to increase consistent 
interpretations of the guidance by FDA staff and manufacturers and provide a more transparent 
framework for determining when submission of a new 510(k) is required.  
The 510(k) Process and the Quality System Regulation 
Any guidance on 510(k)s for changes to a legally marketed device should consider the role the 
Quality System (QS) regulation, 21 CFR Part 820, plays in changes to devices. For some types 
of changes to a device, the Agency believes that submission of a new 510(k) is not required and 
that reliance on existing QS requirements is the least burdensome approach to reasonably assure 
the safety and effectiveness of the changed device.  
Regardless of whether a change requires premarket review, the QS regulation requires 
manufacturers of finished medical devices to review and approve changes to device design and 
production (21 CFR 820.30 and 820.70) and document changes and approvals in the device 
master record (21 CFR 820.181). Any process whose results cannot be fully verified by 
subsequent inspection and testing must be validated (21 CFR 820.75), and changes to the process 
require review, evaluation, and revalidation of the process where appropriate (21 CFR 
820.75(c)).  
The net effect of the QS regulation is to require that, when manufacturers of a finished medical 
device make a change in the design of a device, there is a process in place to demonstrate that the 
 5 
--- page 3 ---
Contains Nonbinding Recommendations 
 
manufactured device meets the change in design specifications (or the original specifications, if 
no change was intended). They must keep records, and these records must be made available to 
an FDA investigator upon request (see Section 704(e) of the FD&C Act). For many changes to a 
device, submission of a new 510(k) may not be required. In these cases, including for many 
design changes, compliance with the QS regulation can reasonably assure the safety and 
effectiveness of the changed device.  
 
 
 
L
east Burdensome Principles 
The least burdensome provision concerning 510(k)s states that FDA “shall only request 
information that is necessary… ” and “shall consider the least burdensome means of 
demonstrating substantial equivalence…”  (see section 513(i)(1)(D)(i) of the FD&C Act). While 
not changing the standard for substantial equivalence, this provision states that FDA shall only 
request the “minimum required information” necessary to support a determination of substantial 
equivalence (see sections 513(i)(1)(D)(ii)-(iii) of the FD&C Act). The recommendations 
discussed in this guidance for evaluating when a change in a medical device would trigger the 
requirement that a manufacturer submit a new 510(k) to the Agency are consistent with least 
burdensome principles, and applies them in discussing the considerations that may affect the 
decision-making about when to submit a new 510(k) for a device change or modification.  
III. Scope 
This guidance will aid manufacturers of medical devices subject to premarket notification 
requirements who intend to modify a 510(k)-cleared device (or group of devices) or other device
 
subject to 510(k) requirements, such as a preamendments device or a device that was granted 
marketing authorization via the De Novo classification process1 under section 513(f)(2) of the 
FD&C Act (also referred to together as “existing devices”), during the process of deciding 
whether the change exceeds the regulatory threshold of 21 CFR 807.81(a)(3) for submission and 
clearance of a new 510(k). Note that any person required to register under 21 CFR 807.20 who 
plans to introduce a device into commercial distribution for the first time must, per 21 CFR 
807.81(a)(2), submit a 510(k) if that device is not exempt from premarket notification 
requirements. Also note that devices with changes requiring submission of a new 510(k) may not 
be legally commercially distributed before FDA clears the changed device (21 CFR 807.100(a) 
and sections 513(f)(1) and 513(i) of the FD&C Act). This guidance is not intended to address 
changes to devices that are 510(k)-exempt or that require premarket approval (PMA). Also, the 
scope of key terminology used in this guidance, particularly intended use and indications for use, 
is limited to medical devices and not other FDA-regulated products. 
This document incorporates concepts and recommendations from existing FDA guidance and 
policy, such as Submission and Review of Sterility Information in Premarket Notification 
(510(k)) Submissions for Devices Labeled as Sterile 
(http://www.fda.gov/downloads/MedicalDevices/.../ucm109897.pdf
), and device-specific final 
guidance documents that identify and characterize specific scenarios regarding when submission 
of new 510(k)s are required or not required based on changes to an existing device. In some 
1 This guidance applies to devices granted marketing authorization via the De Novo 
classification process that are not exempt from premarket notification requirements. 
 6 
                                                 
--- page 4 ---
Contains Nonbinding Recommendations 
 
cases, FDA’s thinking has derived from its experience in situations involving only a few 
manufacturers of a limited number of devices. In such instances, we have attempted to generalize 
the concepts to apply to a broader range of devices. However, special cases exist where FDA has 
established definitive final guidance for changes to specific devices, e.g., FDA’s guidance on 
daily wear contact lenses, Premarket Notification (510(k)) Guidance Document for Daily Wear 
Contact Lenses 
(
http://www.fda.gov/MedicalDevices/DeviceRegulationandGuidance/GuidanceDocuments/ucm0
80928.htm). This guidance is not intended to supersede such final device-specific guidance but 
may cover areas not addressed in such device-specific guidance.  
 
 
 
Recalls: This guidance is also intended to apply to situations when a legally marketed existing 
device is the subject of a recall, correction, or removal, and a change in the device or its labeling 
is necessary. For more information on recommended procedures in a recall situation, please see 
Blue Book Memorandum K95-1, 510(k) Requirements During Firm-Initiated Recalls 
(https://www.fda.gov/MedicalDevices/DeviceRegulationandGuidance/GuidanceDocuments/ucm
080297.htm). As stated in that guidance, if a correction alters a device rather than simply 
restoring it to its original specifications, submission of a new 510(k) may be required. FDA may 
use this guidance in determining whether submission of a new 510(k) is warranted in cases 
where the correction does alter the device. 
Private Label Distributors and Repackagers: Private label distributors and repackagers are 
exempt from submitting a 510(k) if they satisfy the requirements of 21 CFR 807.85(b).  
Sof
tware Changes: This guidance does not address software changes or modifications.  Please 
refer to FDA’s guidance Deciding When to Submit a 510(k) for a Software Change to an Existing 
Device 
(https://www.fda.gov/downloads/MedicalDevices/DeviceRegulationandGuidance/GuidanceDocu
ments/UCM514737.pdf) for recommendations regarding software changes.  
This guidance does apply to non-software changes to devices containing software and non-
software changes to software that is a medical device on its own. For example, labeling changes 
to software are covered by Section A of this guidance, and non-software technology changes and 
materials changes to existing devices that contain software are covered by Sections B through D 
of this guidance.  
 
 
 
W
hen there are multiple changes that affect labeling or hardware in addition to software, the 
manufacturer should assess the changes using both the general and software-specific 
modifications guidances. If use of either guidance leads to a “New 510(k)” conclusion, 
submission of a new 510(k) is likely required.  
Combination Products: This guidance does not specifically address combination products, such 
as drug/device or biologic/device combinations; however, the general principles and concepts 
described herein may be helpful to manufacturers in determining whether submission of a 510(k) 
is required for changes to device constituent parts of combination products.  
Remanufactured or Reprocessed Single Use Devices: This guidance is not intended to address 
whether submission of 510(k)s are required from remanufacturers of existing devices who do not 
hold the 510(k) for the device, such as reprocessors of single-use devices. This guidance does 
apply to reprocessors and remanufacturers who hold their own 510(k) and are addressing 
 7 
--- page 5 ---
Contains Nonbinding Recommendations 
 
changes or modifications. Remanufacturer is defined at 21 CFR 820.3(w) as “any person who 
processes, conditions, renovates, repackages, restores, or does any other act to a finished device 
that significantly changes the finished device’s performance or safety specifications, or intended 
use.”  
IV. Guiding Principles 
In using this guidance for deciding whether to submit a new 510(k) for a change to an existing 
device, a number of guiding principles should be followed. Some derive from existing FDA 
510(k) policy and are widely known, and others are necessary for using the logic scheme 
contained in this guidance. Thus, anyone using this guidance should bear in mind the following 
Guiding Principles: 
 
 
 
 
1.
 Changes made with intent to significantly affect safety or effectiveness of a device – 
If a manufacturer modifies their device with the intent to significantly affect the safety or 
effectiveness of the device (for example, to significantly improve clinical outcomes, to 
mitigate a known risk
, in response to adverse events, etc.), submission of a new 510(k) is 
likely required. A change intended to significantly affect the safety or effectiveness of the 
device is considered to be a change that “could significantly affect the safety or 
effectiveness of the device” and thus requires submission of a new 510(k) regardless of 
the considerations outlined below.  Changes that are not intended to significantly affect 
the safety or effectiveness of a device, however, should still be evaluated to determine 
whether the change could significantly affect device safety or effectiveness. 
I
f a manufacturer modifies their device to address a violation or recall, they should refer 
to FDA guidances Blue Book Memorandum K95-1, 510(k) Requirements During Firm-
Initiated Recalls 
(http://www.fda.gov/MedicalDevices/DeviceRegulationandGuidance/GuidanceDocument
s/ucm080297.htm) and Distinguishing Medical Device Recalls from Medical Device 
Enhancements (http://www.fda.gov/ucm/groups/fdagov-public/@fdagov-meddev-
gen/documents/document/ucm418469.pdf). 
2.
 Initial risk-based assessment – To determine whether a change or modification could 
significantly affect the safety or effectiveness of a device, the manufacturer should first 
conduct a risk-based assessment, using the guidance below, of whether the change could 
significantly affect the device’s safety or effectiveness, either positively or negatively. 
This risk-based assessment should identify and analyze all new risks and changes in 
existing risks resulting from the device change, and lead to an initial decision whether or 
not submission of a new 510(k) is required.  
For the purposes of this guidance, we have chosen the term “risk-based assessment” to 
describe the analysis that should be completed to assist in the determination of whether or 
not a change could significantly affect safety or effectiveness of the device. Although 
common risk analysis methods define risk in terms of device harms and their effects on 
safety, it is important to note that whether submission of a new 510(k) is required 
depends on whether the change could significantly affect the safety or effectiveness of the 
device. Therefore, manufacturers should also consider the possible effects a device 
 8 
--- page 6 ---
Contains Nonbinding Recommendations 
 
change may have on device effectiveness. As such, we have chosen to use the distinct 
terminology of “risk-based assessment.” 
 
 
 
3.
 Unintended consequences of changes – After a manufacturer considers whether the 
change was made with the intent to significantly affect safety or effectiveness, the 
manufacturer should also consider whether the change could have unintended 
consequences. In order to fully assess device changes, manufacturers should consider the 
effects of the planned device changes and whether these changes create any intended 
and/or unintended consequences.  For example, changes in sterilization may 
unintentionally affect device materials, or changes to materials may unintentionally affect 
the performance of the device. Any unintended consequences such as these should be 
evaluated according to the relevant flowcharts (and their companion text) to determine 
whether submission of a new 510(k) is required. For instance, a change in sterilization 
that may unintentionally affect device performance should be reviewed as a sterilization 
change under B3 and as a performance specification change under B5.   
4. Use of risk management – A risk-based assessment as referred to throughout this 
document is based on the combination of multiple risk concepts that are important for 
managing the risks of medical devices. Hazards
 and hazardous situations, risk estimation, 
risk acceptability, risk control, risk/benefit analysis and overall risk evaluation are all 
concepts that can be applied during the design and development of a medical device. The 
concept of risk, as defined in ISO 14971: Medical devices – Application of risk 
management to medical devices, is the combination of the probability of occurrence of 
harm and the severity of that harm. Although the risk terminology used in this document 
is primarily derived from ISO 14971, we recognize that an individual manufacturer’s 
terminology may differ. Because 21 CFR 807.81(a)(3)(i) requires submission of a new 
510(k) when a change “could significantly affect safety or effectiveness,” both safety and 
effectiveness should be considered in evaluating a device’s risk profile and performing a 
risk-based assessment, as explained in Section E. 
This guidance states throughout that submission of a new 510(k) is likely required when a 
risk-based assessment of the changed device identifies any new risks or significantly 
modified existing risks. For the purposes of this guidance, a new risk is a new hazard or 
hazardous situation that did not exist for the original device (see discussion of appropriate 
comparative device below) and the pre-mitigation risk level associated with the new risk 
is not considered to be acceptable. For the purposes of this guidance, a device change 
could be considered to significantly modify an existing risk if it changes the risk score, 
risk acceptability category, or duration of risk. See Section E for further explanation.  
5. The role of testing (i.e., verification and validation activities) in evaluating whether a 
change could significantly affect safety and effectiveness - If the initial decision 
following the risk-based assessment is that submission of a new 510(k) is not required, 
this decision should be confirmed by successful, routine verification and validation 
activities. If routine verification and validation activities produce any unexpected results, 
any prior decision that submission of a new 510(k) is not required should be 
reconsidered, as discussed in B5.4 for non-IVD devices and D4 for IVD devices. 
“Routine” activities in this context refer to the original design verification and validation 
activities that were done to assess the original device design. Because 21 CFR 
 9 
--- page 7 ---
Contains Nonbinding Recommendations 
 
807.81(a)(3) requires submission of a new 510(k) for a change that “could significantly 
affect safety or effectiveness,” if the result of a risk-based assessment is that a change 
could significantly affect safety or effectiveness, submission of a new 510(k) is required  
even if routine verification and validation activities are conducted successfully without 
any unexpected results. Note that verification and validation requirements apply for all 
devices subject to 21 CFR 820.30, and must be conducted regardless of whether 
submission of a new 510(k) is required.  
 
 
 
 
6.
 Evaluating simultaneous changes to determine whether submission of a new 510(k) 
is required – Because many simultaneous changes may be considered at once, each 
change should be assessed separately, as well as in aggregate.  
7. Appropriate comparative device and cumulative effect of changes – In using this 
guidance to help determine whether a particular change requires submission of a new 
510(k), manufacturers should conduct a risk-based assessment that compares the changed 
device to their device as previously found to be substantially equivalent in their most 
recently cleared 510(k), to their preamendments device (if the device was in commercial 
distribution before May 28, 1976 and there have not been changes to it subsequently 
cleared in a 510(k)), or to their device that was granted marketing authorization via the 
De Novo classification process (if there have not been changes to it subsequently cleared 
in a 510(k)). The appropriate comparative device is referred to as the “original device” 
throughout this guidance document.  Of note, this comparison is different from a 
substantial equivalence comparison between the modified device and a legally marketed 
predicate device. Manufacturers may make a number of changes without having to 
submit a new 510(k), but each time they make a change, the modified device should be 
compared to the original device (i.e., the device described in their most recently cleared 
510(k) for the device, their legally marketed preamendments device, or their device that 
was granted marketing authorization via the De Novo classification process). When the 
cumulative effect of individual changes triggers the regulatory threshold for submission, 
the manufacturer should submit a new 510(k). When it does not, the manufacturer must 
document the change(s) (see 21 CFR Part 820.30).  
8. Documentation requirement – Whenever manufacturers change their device, they must 
take certain actions to comply with the QS regulation, 21 CFR Part 820, unless the device 
in question is exempt by regulation from the QS regulation. The QS regulation requires, 
among other things, that device changes be documented. The scope and type of 
documentation may vary, but the process of documenting the decisions described in this 
guidance should be established as part of the manufacturer’s own quality system.   See 
Appendix B for further explanation and recommendations on documentation
. 
9.
 510(k) submissions for modified devices – When a new 510(k) is submitted for a device 
with multiple changes, that 510(k) should describe all changes that trigger the 
requirement for submission of a new 510(k). To help ensure that FDA has a complete 
understanding of the device under review, that 510(k) should also describe other changes 
since the most recently cleared 510(k) (i.e., those that did not require submission of a new 
510(k)) that would have been documented as part of the first 510(k) for that device. For 
instance, 510(k)s typically include a listing of device warnings
 in the labeling, so if a 
warning in the device’s labeling had been changed, that change should be described in 
 10 
--- page 8 ---
Contains Nonbinding Recommendations 
 
the new 510(k), even if that change did not itself trigger the requirement for submission 
of a new 510(k).  However, a 510(k) would not typically identify or describe individual 
components of a circuit board, such as resistors, and therefore FDA would not expect 
changes to the resistors to be listed in the new 510(k) for a modified device because the 
first 510(k) would not have included information about the resistors.   
If a manufacturer makes multiple changes to a device, but only one change triggers the 
requirement for submission of a new 510(k), the changes that do not require submission 
of a new 510(k) may be immediately implemented, so long as those changes can be 
implemented independently of changes that do require submission of a new 510(k). Any 
immediately implemented change should still be documented in accordance with 
applicable QS regulations and the manufacturer’s documentation procedures. Those 
changes should, however, also be described in the new 510(k) for the change that does 
require submission.  
 
 
 
10.
 Substantial equivalence determinations – Manufacturers should understand that, even 
though they may follow this guidance and submit a new 510(k), a substantially equivalent 
determination is not assured. See FDA’s guidance The 510(k) Program: Evaluating 
Substantial Equivalence in Premarket Notifications (510(k)) 
(
https://www.fda.gov/downloads/medicaldevices/deviceregulationandguidance/guidanced
ocuments/ucm284443.pdf) for more information on the decision-making process FDA 
uses to determine substantial equivalence. 
V. How to Use This Guidance 
This guidance uses flowcharts and text to guide manufacturers through the logic scheme we 
recommend to arrive at a decision on whether to submit a new 510(k) for a change to an existing 
device. A single logic scheme containing all the necessary steps would be large and cumbersome 
and could be quite daunting. Rather, for ease of use, the single scheme has been broken down 
into smaller sections that include: 
• The main types of changes that might be made to a device (this section, Main Flowchart) 
• Labeling changes (Section A, Flowchart A) 
• Technology, engineering, and performance changes (Section B, Flowchart B) 
• Materials changes (Section C, Flowchart C) 
• Technology, engineering, performance, and materials changes for 
in vitro diagnostic 
devices (IVDs) (Section D, Flowchart D) 
• Considerations for risk-based assessments of modified devices (Section E) 
The main flowchart is provided in Figure 1 below and guides the manufacturer to the appropriate 
specific section(s) and flowchart(s) to assess their specific change(s). 
When using the flowcharts, the reader should interpret “new 510(k)” as submission of a new 
510(k) is likely required and “documentation” as submission of a new 510(k) is likely not 
required, document your analysis and file it for future reference. Please refer to Appendix C: 
Significant Terminology for the meaning of terms used in the guidance, including in the 
flowcharts.  
 
 11 
--- page 9 ---
Contains Nonbinding Recommendations 
 
Note that the first question is whether the change is being made with the intent to significantly 
improve the safety or effectiveness of the device, for example, to significantly improve clinical 
outcomes, to mitigate a known risk, in response to adverse events, etc. (Figure 1 – Main Flowchart).   
If so, the change likely could significantly affect safety or effectiveness and submission of a new 
510(k) is likely required. If not, you should continue to follow the logic scheme shown in Figure 1, 
below.  
 
 
 
Change made with intent to 
significan tly  impro ve the 
safety or effectiveness of the 
dev ic e
Labeling change?
No
Yes
Technology, engineering, 
or perf ormance cha ng e?
No
Yes
Materials change?
No
Yes
Go to Chart A
Go to Chart B,
or Chart D if IVD
Go to Chart C, 
or Chart D if IVD
New 510(k)Yes
Documentation
No
Reminder: Flowcharts are 
provided as a visual aid, but 
do not capture all necessary 
considerations. R ef er to 
accompanying text when 
using th is flo wch ar t. 
Refer to Section E as 
directed by the text for 
additional 
recommendations on 
use of risk assessment.
Figure 1 - Main Flowchart 
 12
 
--- page 10 ---
Contains Nonbinding Recommendations 
 
Note that sections B and C are only applicable to non-IVDs, and section D is only applicable to 
IVDs. All other sections apply to both IVDs and non-IVDs.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
E
ach of the questions listed on the detailed flowcharts are identified by the flowchart letter (A 
through D) and a sequential number. Those questions on the main spine of the flowcharts relate 
to major questions to be answered. Subsidiary questions are identified by the flowchart letter, the 
question number, a decimal point, and another sequential number (e.g., B4.1 is a decision point 
containing a follow-up question that builds off a determination made in decision point B4).  
Manufacturers should use the flowcharts in concert with the Guiding Principles above, the 
recommendations in the sections below, and the examples provided in Appendix A. 
Manufacturers should follow all the applicable flowcharts and use their companion text to 
answer the questions posed for each individual type of change (e.g., performance change, 
material change) until a decision is made either to submit a new 510(k), or to document the basis 
for concluding that submission of a new 510(k) is not required. As mentioned above, when 
making the decision on whether to submit a new 510(k) for changes, the manufacturer's basis for 
comparison of any changed device should be the original device. Manufacturers are required to 
submit a new 510(k) when a change (or changes) exceeds the 21 CFR 807.81(a)(3) threshold, 
“could significantly affect the safety or effectiveness of the device,” or constitutes a “major 
change or modification in the intended use of the device.” This significant effect could be 
positive or negative. One must keep in mind that what may on the surface appear to be one 
discrete change to a device may involve multiple changes of various types. 
Although this guidance does not specifically discuss manufacturing changes, a 
manufacturer should consider the impact of all manufacturing changes on device labeling, 
technology/engineering/performance, and/or materials. If the manufacturing change affects 
any of these three areas, manufacturers should evaluate the impact of the resulting labeling, 
technology/engineering/performance, or material change using the appropriate flowcharts and 
companion text. Specifically, consideration should be given to those devices for which 
manufacturing information was submitted in the most recently cleared 510(k) in order to assist in 
the characterization of the device and technology, such as bioresorbables, polymers, and 
biological fixation type devices. When manufacturing changes do not impact device labeling, 
technology/engineering/performance, and/or materials, there is no need to use the  flow charts 
and their companion text to document the decision not to submit a new 510(k). 
In cases with multiple changes, manufacturers should use all applicable flowcharts and 
companion text, including the Guiding Principles in Section IV of this guidance. Consider 
the following examples: 
Example 1: Multiple changes caused by a manufacturing process change 
A manufacturer decides to change the manufacturing process for a patient-contacting part 
from a machining process to a stamping process. The use of the stamping process 
requires a change in the grade of stainless steel and also results in a change of the 
dimensional tolerances. To evaluate the impact of this change, the manufacturer should 
use both Sections B (Technology, Engineering, and Performance) and C (Materials). 
 13 
--- page 11 ---
Contains Nonbinding Recommendations 
 
Example 2: Multiple changes related to a change in shelf-life 
 
 
 
 
A
 manufacturer changes one or more materials in a device to improve the shelf-life of the 
product. The material change also affects some of the performance characteristics, 
resulting in the need to update the labeling. To evaluate the impact of the change, the 
manufacturer should use Sections A (Labeling), B (Technology, Engineering, and 
Performance) and C (Materials) or D (Technology, Engineering, Performance, and 
Materials Changes for IVD Devices). 
Changes not addressed in Sections A through D should be evaluated with a risk-based 
assessment using the recommendations provided in Section E.  In instances where the 
specific flowcharts do not address a given change, Section E provides recommendations for how 
manufacturers should utilize risk management principles to evaluate their own specific changes 
and modifications.   Because 21 CFR 807.81(a)(3)(i) requires submission of a new 510(k) when 
a change “could significantly affect safety or effectiveness,” both safety and effectiveness should 
be considered in evaluating a device’s risk profile, as explained in the Guiding Principles and 
Section E. For those circumstances where the proposed change is not addressed in this guidance 
or in a device-specific guidance document, manufacturers are encouraged to contact CDRH staff
 
or CBER staff.  
A. Labeling Changes 
As noted above, the guidance focuses on the following types of changes: labeling changes, 
technology, engineering, or performance changes, and materials changes. This guidance 
identifies several types of labeling changes or modifications to an existing device, including 
certain changes to the indications for use, that can have a major impact on intended use and thus 
require submission of a new 510(k) under 21 CFR 807.81(a)(3).
2  All labeling changes should be 
evaluated using a separate logic scheme that concentrates on changes in indications for use and 
applies a risk-based assessment framework for determining whether submission of a new 510(k) 
is required. Focusing on indications for use and using a risk-based assessment for labeling 
changes will also help identify those changes that are more frequently recommended for 
documentation only.  
F
lowchart A describes the logic scheme to be used when determining when submission of a new 
510(k) is required for a labeling change. Changes in device labeling often pose the most difficult 
questions to be addressed by device manufacturers when deciding whether submission of a new 
510(k) is required. Frequently, an apparently subtle change in a device’s labeling can have a 
significant impact on the safe and effective use of the device.  
Confusion often results when discussing the distinction between “indications for use
” and the 
“intended use” of the device. For purposes of substantial equivalence, and for the purposes of 
this guidance, the term intended use means the general purpose of the device or its function, and 
encompasses the indications for use.
3 The indications for use generally describe the disease or 
2 Labeling changes are not the only type of changes that could result in a major change in intended use. See 21 CFR 
801.4.  
3 When submitting a 510(k) premarket notification to FDA for review, an applicant must submit, among other 
things, information concerning a device’s intended use(s), as described in the proposed labeling (21 CFR 807.92(a)). 
 14 
                                                 
 
--- page 12 ---
Contains Nonbinding Recommendations 
 
condition the device will diagnose, treat, prevent, cure or mitigate, including a description of the 
patient population for which the device is intended.4 The indications include all the labeled 
patient uses of the device. As it relates to medical devices, the indications for use statement is a 
factor in determining a device’s intended use; however, a change in indications for use that 
requires the submission of a new 510(k) does not necessarily mean that the device has a new 
intended use (such that the device would not be substantially equivalent under section 513(i) of 
the FD&C Act).
5  
 
FDA looks to this aspect of the submission to make a substantial equivalence determination under section 513(i) of 
the Federal Food, Drug, and Cosmetic Act (FD&C Act), which requires FDA to evaluate whether, based on the 
proposed labeling, the device and a predicate device have the same intended use. If a particular labeling change 
results in an intended use of the device that is not the same as the intended use of the original device, the device 
would not be substantially equivalent.
 See also FDA’s guidance The 510(k) Program: Evaluating Substantial 
Equivalence in Premarket Notifications (510(k)) 
(https://www.fda.gov/downloads/medicaldevices/deviceregulationandguidance/guidancedocuments/ucm284443.pdf )  
Although, in evaluating substantial equivalence in reviewing a 510(k), FDA must determine the intended use of a 
device based on the proposed labeling, see 21 USC 513(i)(1)(E), FDA may consider other evidence of intended use 
in determining whether there has been a major change or modification in the intended use of the device under 21 
CFR 807.81(a)(3).
 
4 See FDA’s guidance The 510(k) Program: Evaluating Substantial Equivalence in Premarket Notifications (510(k))  
(https://www.fda.gov/downloads/medicaldevices/deviceregulationandguidance/guidancedocuments/ucm284443.pdf) 
5 Ibid. 
 15 
                                                                                                                                                             
--- page 13 ---
Contains Nonbinding Recommendations 
 
From Main Chart
A1
Is it a change in the 
indications for use 
statement?
No
A2
Does the change add or 
delete a contraindication?
A3 
Is it a change in the 
warnings or precautions?
No
A4
Could it affect the directions 
for use?
No
A1.1
Is it a change from a device 
labeled for single use only to a 
device labeled as reusable?
A1.2
Is it a change from Rx to over 
the counter OTC use?
A1.4
Does the change 
describe a new disease, 
condition, or pt pop that the 
device is intended  in 
diagnosing, treating, 
preventing, cur in g or 
mitigatin g?
New 510(k)
A1.3
Is it a change to the device 
name or to solely improve 
readability or clarity?
A1.5
Do es a risk-based assessment  
identify any new risks or 
significantly modified existing 
risks
Yes
No
No
No
Yes
Yes
YesDocumentation
No
New 510(k) (If only adding a 
contraindication, submit 
CBE 510(k))
Yes
Yes
No
No
Yes
Yes
Reminder: Flowcharts are 
provided as a visual aid, but 
do not capture all necessary 
considerations. R ef er to 
accompanying text when 
using th is flo wch ar t.
Refer to Section E as 
directed by the text for 
additional 
recommendations on use 
of risk assessment.
Yes
 
 
F
igure 2 - Flowchart A: Labeling Changes 
 16
 
--- page 14 ---
Contains Nonbinding Recommendations 
 
A1.  Is it a change in the indications for use statement? Changes in the indications for use 
statement raise more Agency concern than any other aspect of labeling. In fact, most  
labeling changes that affect the substance, meaning, or scope of the indications for use 
could significantly affect safety or effectiveness and will require submission of a new 
510(k). Changes that clarify the indications without affecting the substance or meaning of 
the indications usually do not require submission of a new 510(k). In addition, some 
changes in the indications for use that limit use within the currently cleared indication 
may occur without submission of a new 510(k). For example, if a device was cleared for 
use with three specific indications and the firm decides to market the device for only two 
of those indications, this change would not likely require submission of a new 510(k).  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
I
f the labeling change is to the indications for use statement, proceed to A.1.1.  
Otherwise, proceed to A.2. 
It should be noted the decision points in A1.1-A1.5 may apply not only to changes to the 
indications for use statement of the labeling, but also to changes to other sections of the labeling, 
such as the directions for use of the device. You should review these decision points when 
directed by the text of this guidance and Flowchart A: Labeling Changes. 
A1.1 Is it a change from a device labeled for single use only to a device labeled as 
reusable? 
FDA has found that the performance and risks associated with a reusable device can 
 be 
significantly different from the performance and risks associated with that same device 
when it is labeled for single use only. Therefore, changing a device labeled for single use 
only to a device that is labeled as reusable typically could significantly affect the safety 
or effectiveness and would likely require submission of a new 510(k). Changing a device 
labeled for reuse to single use only, however, would likely not require submission of a 
new 510(k) because a single use is a limitation of the previously cleared indications for 
multiple uses, and the risks of single use were inherently considered within the risks of 
multiple uses.  
If it is not this type of labeling change, proceed to A.1.2. 
A.1.2 Is it a change from prescription (Rx) to over the counter (OTC) use? 
FDA has found that the directions for use necessary for health care professionals to use a 
device safely and effectively can be significantly different from the directions for use 
necessary for lay users to use that same device safely and effectively. Therefore, 
changing a device labeled for prescription use only to a device that is labeled for OTC 
use typically could significantly affect the safety or effectiveness and would likely 
require submission of a new 510(k).  Changing a device labeled for OTC use to 
prescription use, however, would likely not require submission of a new 510(k) because 
it is unlikely that the associated labeling changes could significantly affect the safety or 
effectiveness of the device.  
If it is not this type of labeling change, proceed to A.1.3.  
 17 
--- page 15 ---
Contains Nonbinding Recommendations 
 
A.1.3.  Is it a change to the device name or a change solely to improve readability or 
clarity? 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
C
hanges to the device name or description that are consistent with the cleared indications 
for use typically do not significantly affect the safety or effectiveness and would likely 
not require  submission of a new 510(k). Changes that are solely to improve readability or 
clarity that are consistent with the cleared indications for use typically do not 
significantly affect the safety or effectiveness and likely would not require submission of 
a new 510(k).  
If it is not this type of labeling change, proceed to A.1.4. 
A.1.4 Does the change describe a new disease, condition, or patient population that the 
device is intended for use in diagnosing, treating, preventing, curing or mitigating? 
Differences in indications for use should be analyzed to explain how they are or are not 
critical to the intended therapeutic, diagnostic, prosthetic, or surgical use of the device, 
and how the differences do or do not affect the safety and effectiveness of the device. 
 
Specific changes that could significantly affect the safety and effectiveness include 
describing a new disease, condition, or patient population that the device is intended for 
use in diagnosing, treating, preventing, curing or mitigating (or an anatomical site from 
which a new disease, condition, or population may be inferred).  The criticality of these 
types of changes and their direct effect on safety and effectiveness means that a change to 
add a new disease, condition, or patient population likely requires submission of a new 
510(k).    
As introduced prior to Section A.1.1., not all changes that describe a new disease, 
condition, or patient population that the device will diagnose, treat, prevent, cure or 
mitigate are necessarily made in the indications for use section of the labeling. These 
types of changes could also result from a change to other sections of the labeling, such as 
the directions for use of the device. For example, a device’s directions for use may be 
revised from providing that the device is to be used when symptoms occur (i.e., use in the 
treatment of a disease or condition) to providing that the device is to be used once per 
day, even in the absence of symptoms (i.e., use in the prevention of a disease or 
condition). In this example, the patient population has changed from patients who have 
been previously diagnosed with a disease or condition to asymptomatic or healthy 
individuals. Because this change describes a new patient population, submission of a new 
510(k) is likely required. 
To evaluate whether a change in patient population is a new and distinguishable patient 
population, manufacturers should compare the demographics, diagnosis, prognosis, 
comorbidity, and potential for complications of the patient population described in the 
previously cleared 510(k) to those of the modified patient population. If the change 
describes a patient population with similar demographics, diagnosis, prognosis, 
comorbidity and potential for complications, then submission of a new 510(k) is likely 
not required. However, if any of these factors differ between patient populations, 
submission of a new 510(k) would likely be required.  
 18 
--- page 16 ---
Contains Nonbinding Recommendations 
 
One method for determining whether changes to the demographics, diagnosis, prognosis, 
comorbidity, and potential for complications of the previously cleared patient populations  
result in a new and distinguishable patient population is to assess if the changes could 
significantly affect a device’s risk profile through a risk-based assessment as described in 
A.1.5 and Section E. For example, if the most recently cleared patient population 
included only individuals with Stage IV carcinoma, and the modified patient population 
added individuals with Stage III carcinoma, a risk-based assessment considering the 
factors outlined in section A.1.5 could help determine whether there are any new risks or 
significantly modified existing risks that would require submission of a new 510(k).  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
I
f it is not this type of labeling change, you should proceed to A.1.5. 
A.1.5. Does a risk-based assessment of the changed device identify any new risks or 
significantly modified existing risks?  
For changes that are not addressed by the previous questions in this section, thus 
necessitating the use of a risk-based assessment as described in Section E, the factors 
discussed below should be considered as part of such an assessment for a labeling 
change.  
As discussed in Question 1 of the Main Flowchart, if a change is intended to significantly 
affect safety or effectiveness, particularly those meant to significantly improve clinical 
outcomes, to mitigate a known risk, or in response to adverse events, that change likely 
requires submission of a new 510(k); this includes changes to the indications for use. For 
labeling changes that are not intended to significantly affect safety or effectiveness, 
manufacturers should consult Flowchart A and Section E and consider whether the 
change creates new risks or significantly modifies existing risks.  
Changes to the labeling can affect a device’s risk profile by affecting how, when, where, 
or by whom the device is used. As part of the risk-based assessment of a labeling change, 
manufacturers should consider whether the change could introduce human factors or 
usability issues that could significantly affect users’ understanding of the labeling and use 
of the device. Changes that significantly affect a device’s risk profile likely require 
submission of a new 510(k).  
As further described in Section E, the risk-based assessment should include an analysis of 
both safety and effectiveness. A risk-based assessment will help manufacturers determine 
whether changes such as the following could significantly affect safety or effectiveness 
and would require submission of a new 510(k).   
Changes to the type of joint, organ, bone, vasculature, or tissue applied to or 
interacted with, regardless of the section of labeling in which this information is 
contained: Although some changes to the type of joint, organ, bone, vasculature, or 
tissue applied to or interacted with would involve a new disease, condition, or patient 
population, and thus lead to a decision to submit a new 510(k) under A.1.4, a risk-based 
assessment would be appropriate for other changes in this category. How a change to the 
type of joint, organ, bone, vasculature, or tissue applied to or interacted with affects a 
device’s risk profile depends on the specific change. For example, a change from use of a 
 19 
--- page 17 ---
Contains Nonbinding Recommendations 
 
bone fixation system – plates, screws, and wires – in an extremity to use in the skull is 
likely to significantly affect the device’s risk profile and require submission of a new 
510(k). Alternatively, a bone fixation system used on one type of long bone changed to 
use on a different type of long bone may not significantly affect the device’s risk profile 
and is less likely to require submission of a new 510(k).    
 
 
 
 
 
 
C
hanges in user or use environment: How a change of this type affects a device’s risk 
profile depends on the differences in use environment and environmental specifications. 
For example, a change from use in a surgical suite to use in a hospital recovery room, 
both of which will have professional healthcare supervision, may not significantly affect 
the device’s risk profile. Similarly, changes between users with similar training on a 
specific device, such as changes between a general physician and a specialist using basic 
medical equipment may not significantly affect a device’s risk profile. However, changes 
from professional use to home use
6 or hospital use to ambulatory transport are more 
likely to affect the device’s risk profile and require submission of a new 510(k) because 
the different environments have different levels of professional healthcare supervision 
and offer different environmental challenges, such as presence of other electronic devices 
that can cause electromagnetic interference, different levels of cleanliness, or shocks and 
vibrations associated with patient travel or ambulatory use. Similarly, changes from 
professional use to home use, hospital use to ambulatory transport, or between any other 
healthcare providers with different levels of training on specific devices are more likely 
to affect the device’s risk profile and require submission of a new 510(k) because the 
different level of training could significantly affect the safe and effective use of the 
device.  
Changes in frequency or duration of use: Changes in the frequency or duration of use 
of a device include changes indicating that a device can or should be used more or less 
often, changes indicating that a device can perform a task or treat a condition in or for a 
different duration of time, or changes between periodic and continuous monitoring. 
Manufacturers should evaluate the effect such changes could have on the performance of 
a device, and whether such changes significantly affect the device’s risk profile. 
Changes concerning the compatibility or interoperability of a device with other 
devices, components, or accessories: Two examples of such changes would include 1) 
changes indicating an IVD reagent for use with a new system, and 2) changes that 
describe how to use an infusion pump with inputs from other devices not described in the 
previously cleared 510(k), such as a pulse oximeter or blood pressure monitor.  
To evaluate whether these changes significantly affect the device’s risk profile, 
manufacturers should carefully consider the following factors: 
6 A home use medical device is a medical device intended for users in any environment outside of a professional 
healthcare facility. This includes devices intended for use in both professional healthcare facilities and homes. See 
FDA’s Home Use Devices website for more information: 
http://www.fda.gov/MedicalDevices/ProductsandMedicalProcedures/HomeHealthandConsumer/HomeUseDevices/d
efault.htm.  
 20 
                                                 
--- page 18 ---
Contains Nonbinding Recommendations 
 
• Differences between the other devices, components, or accessories referred to in 
the previously cleared indications and the ones referred to in the modified 
indications. Manufacturers should be able to clearly identify and analyze the risks 
associated with such differences, including whether the change may affect 
biocompatibility, performance, connectivity, etc. If the change is to indicate 
compatibility with a type of device, component, or accessory that was not 
indicated as compatible previously, that change will likely require submission of a 
new 510(k).
  
• The criticality of the other device, component, or accessory; the more critical the 
other device, component, or accessory is to overall system function, the more 
likely a labeling change regarding compatibility or interoperability could 
significantly affect safety or effectiveness.  
• The labeling of the other device, component, or accessory. If the change is to 
indicate compatibility or interoperability with another device that is labeled for 
use with the subject device or device type, it is less likely that the change 
introduces a compatibility or interoperability issue that could significantly affect 
safety or effectiveness.  
 
 
I
VD manufacturers should see also FDA’s guidance Replacement Reagent and 
Instrument Family Policy 
(http://www.fda.gov/downloads/medicaldevices/deviceregulationandguidance/guidanced
ocuments/ucm071465.pdf).  
C
hanges from a general use to a more specific use: These types of changes include 
those changes made to identify a specific use when the cleared device has a general 
indication for use. These changes are among the most difficult to assess. FDA’s 
Guidance for Industry: General/Specific Intended Use 
(https://www.fda.gov/RegulatoryInformation/Guidances/ucm073944.htm
) provides 
information on when a specific indication for use is reasonably included within a general 
indication for use for purposes of determining substantial equivalence, i.e., whether a 
510(k) can be cleared or whether, instead, a PMA or De Novo request is required. The 
factors discussed therein – particularly those discussing the risk and public health impact 
of an indications for use change – may be helpful to consider in deciding whether to 
submit a new 510(k) for a change to an existing device, but that guidance should not be 
used in and of itself to justify that submission of a new 510(k) is not required. The 
General/Specific guidance is not intended to provide guidance on when submission of a 
new 510(k) is required for changes to an existing device.  
 
If
 a risk-based assessment indicates that the change leads to a significant change in the 
device’s risk profile, submission of a new 510(k) is likely required.  
 
A2.  Does the change add or delete a contraindication? Changes in the labeled 
contraindications for device use generally could significantly affect safety or 
effectiveness of a device and should typically be reviewed by the Agency; however, FDA 
recognizes that, in general, the addition of a contraindication based on new information is 
important to public health. Thus, FDA does not intend to object if manufacturers add new 
contraindications to their labeling and notify existing users of their device as 
expeditiously as possible whenever a pressing public health need arises. In this situation, 
 21 
--- page 19 ---
Contains Nonbinding Recommendations 
 
the new labeling should be submitted to FDA as part of a new 510(k) that is prominently 
labeled “change being effected” (CBE, in Figure 2- Flowchart A). Manufacturers should 
ensure they are thoroughly familiar with the definition of a contraindication in such 
situations.
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Deletion or modification of a contraindication also usually requires submission of a new 
510(k) prior to effecting the change, because this type of labeling change typically 
changes the indications for use in a way that could significantly affect safety or 
effectiveness. Deletions of contraindications would expand the indications for use. For 
example, if a physical restraint was contraindicated for use with individuals weighing less 
than 100 pounds because of established life-threatening and other serious adverse events, 
and the manufacturer subsequently wishes to remove this contraindication, submission of 
a new 510(k) is likely required. 
 Similar to changes in indications for use, minor changes that clarify or reword a 
contraindication without changing the meaning of the contraindications would not 
typically require submission of a new 510(k).  
If the change adds or deletes a contraindication, submission of a new 510(k) is likely 
required. Otherwise, proceed to A3. 
A3. Is it a change in warnings or precautions? In order to facilitate a continuous upgrading 
in device labeling, manufacturers should monitor device usage and promptly revise the 
warnings and precautions
 section(s) based on user experience. Events that precipitate 
changes of this type may be those reported under the medical device reporting regulation 
(MDR), 21 CFR Part 803. Submission of new 510(k)s for such labeling changes are 
generally not required. However, to determine whether the change in warnings or 
precautions requires submission of a new 510(k), manufacturers should proceed to A.1.1 
and follow Flowchart A through A.1.5.  If it is not a change in warnings or precautions, 
manufacturers should proceed to A4. 
A4
. Could the change affect the directions for use of the device? Device labeling may be 
changed for a multitude of reasons. Many labeling changes result from attempts to clarify 
labeling. Manufacturers should consider whether the change is intended to or could affect 
how the device is used in practice.  
Manufacturers should evaluate labeling changes to determine whether the change affects 
the directions for use
 of the device, including IVD labeling required under 21 CFR 
809.10. If the change affects the directions for use, the change should subsequently be 
analyzed under A.1.1 through A.1.5. If the change could not affect the directions for use 
of the device, submission of a new 510(k) is likely not required based on the labeling 
change. 
E
xamples of changes that affect the directions for use of the device, and that should be 
analyzed under A1.1 through A1.5 include: 
 22 
--- page 20 ---
Contains Nonbinding Recommendations 
 
• Adding additional or new instructions on how to interpret diagnostic data from a 
diagnostic device. 
• Adding a new procedural technique not described in the original labeling. 
• Use of a product for a duration/frequency that is different than what is described 
in the labeling of the cleared device. 
• Changing from labeling a device as non-sterile to labeling it as sterile or vice 
versa. 
• Adding instructions for device use in a new patient population not described in 
the original indications for use. 
• Adding instructions for device use in a different type of joint, organ, bone, 
vasculature, or  tissue. 
 
F
DA believes that, if manufacturers follow this approach to changes in device labeling, only 
necessary new 510(k)s (those changes that could significantly impact safety and effectiveness) 
will be submitted, while the submission of unnecessary new 510(k)s (those that could not 
significantly affect safety and effectiveness) will be minimized. At the same time, manufacturers 
should be able to retain the flexibility to improve their labeling to assure safe and effective use of 
their devices. 
B. Technology, Engineering, and Performance Changes 
These types of changes encompass a broad span of design activities, from minor engineering 
changes in a circuit board layout to a change from electromechanical to microprocessor control 
of device function. Flowchart B illustrates the decision-making logic scheme for such 
technology, engineering, and performance changes to a device. These changes should be 
evaluated using this scheme, and then the changes should be verified and/or validated according 
to the QS requirements (21 CFR 820.30(i)). If the results of the verification and/or validation 
raise any unexpected issues, the decision of whether submission of a new 510(k) is required 
should be re-evaluated per B5.4. 
 23 