
8 CFR Part 274a - Control of Employment of Aliens
=================================================


§ 274a.1 Definitions.
---------------------

For the purpose of this part—

(a) The term unauthorized alien means, with respect to employment of an alien at a
particular time, that the alien is not at that time either: (1) Lawfully admitted for
permanent residence, or (2) authorized to be so employed by this Act or by the Attorney
General;

(b) The term entity means any legal entity, including but not limited to, a corporation,
partnership, joint venture, governmental body, agency, proprietorship, or association;

(c) The term hire means the actual commencement of employment of an employee for wages or
other remuneration. For purposes of section 274A(a)(4) of the Act and 8 CFR 274a.5, a hire
occurs when a person or entity uses a contract, subcontract, or exchange entered into,
renegotiated, or extended after November 6, 1986 (or, with respect to the Commonwealth of
the Northern Mariana Islands, after the transition program effective date as defined in 8
CFR 1.1), to obtain the labor of an alien in the United States, knowing that the alien is an
unauthorized alien;

(d) The term refer for a fee means the act of sending or directing a person or transmitting
documentation or information to another, directly or indirectly, with the intent of
obtaining employment in the United States for such person, for remuneration whether on a
retainer or contingency basis; however, this term does not include union hiring halls that
refer union members or non-union individuals who pay union membership dues;

(e) The term recruit for a fee means the act of soliciting a person, directly or indirectly,
and referring that person to another with the intent of obtaining employment for that
person, for remuneration whether on a retainer or contingency basis; however, this term does
not include union hiring halls that refer union members or non-union individuals who pay
union membership dues;

(f) The term employee means an individual who provides services or labor for an employer for
wages or other remuneration but does not mean independent contractors as defined in
paragraph (j) of this section or those engaged in casual domestic employment as stated in
paragraph (h) of this section;

(g) The term employer means a person or entity, including an agent or anyone acting directly
or indirectly in the interest thereof, who engages the services or labor of an employee to
be performed in the United States for wages or other remuneration. In the case of an
independent contractor or contract labor or services, the term employer shall mean the
independent contractor or contractor and not the person or entity using the contract labor;

(h) The term employment means any service or labor performed by an employee for an employer
within the United States, including service or labor performed on a vessel or aircraft that
has arrived in the United States and has been inspected, or otherwise included within the
provisions of the Anti-Reflagging Act codified at 46 U.S.C. 8704, but not including duties
performed by nonimmigrant crewmen defined in sections 101 (a)(10) and (a)(15)(D) of the Act.
However, employment does not include casual employment by individuals who provide domestic
service in a private home that is sporadic, irregular or intermittent;

(i) The term State employment agency means any State government unit designated to cooperate
with the United States Employment Service in the operation of the public employment service
system;

(j) The term independent contractor includes individuals or entities who carry on
independent business, contract to do a piece of work according to their own means and
methods, and are subject to control only as to results. Whether an individual or entity is
an independent contractor, regardless of what the individual or entity calls itself, will be
determined on a case-by-case basis. Factors to be considered in that determination include,
but are not limited to, whether the individual or entity: supplies the tools or materials;
makes services available to the general public; works for a number of clients at the same
time; has an opportunity for profit or loss as a result of labor or services provided;
invests in the facilities for work; directs the order or sequence in which the work is to be
done and determines the hours during which the work is to be done. The use of labor or
services of an independent contractor are subject to the restrictions in section 274A(a)(4)
of the Act and § 274a.5 of this part;

(k) The term pattern or practice means regular, repeated, and intentional activities, but
does not include isolated, sporadic, or accidental acts;

(l)(1) The term knowing includes not only actual knowledge but also knowledge which may
fairly be inferred through notice of certain facts and circumstances which would lead a
person, through the exercise of reasonable care, to know about a certain condition.
Constructive knowledge may include, but is not limited to, situations where an employer:

(i) Fails to complete or improperly completes the Employment Eligibility Verification Form,
I-9;

(ii) Has information available to it that would indicate that the alien is not authorized to
work, such as Labor Certification and/or an Application for Prospective Employer; or

(iii) Acts with reckless and wanton disregard for the legal consequences of permitting
another individual to introduce an unauthorized alien into its work force or to act on its
behalf.

(2) Knowledge that an employee is unauthorized may not be inferred from an employee's
foreign appearance or accent. Nothing in this definition should be interpreted as permitting
an employer to request more or different documents than are required under section 274(b) of
the Act or to refuse to honor documents tendered that on their face reasonably appear to be
genuine and to relate to the individual.


----------------------------------------------------------------------


§ 274a.2 Verification of identity and employment authorization.
---------------------------------------------------------------

(a) General. This section establishes requirements and procedures for compliance by persons
or entities when hiring, or when recruiting or referring for a fee, or when continuing to
employ individuals in the United States.

(1) Recruiters and referrers for a fee. For purposes of complying with section 274A(b) of
the Act and this section, all references to recruiters and referrers for a fee are limited
to a person or entity who is either an agricultural association, agricultural employer, or
farm labor contractor (as defined in section 3 of the Migrant and Seasonal Agricultural
Worker Protection Act, Pub. L. 97-470 (29 U.S.C. 1802)).

(2) Verification form. Form I-9, Employment Eligibility Verification Form, is used in
complying with the requirements of this 8 CFR 274a.1-274a.11. Form I-9 can be in paper or
electronic format. A fillable electronic Form I-9 as well as a paper format Form I-9 may be
obtained and downloaded from http://www.uscis.gov. Paper forms may also be ordered at
https://www.uscis.gov/forms/forms-by-mail or by contacting the USCIS Contact Center at
1-800-375-5283 or 1-800-767-1833 (TTY). Alternatively, Form I-9 can be electronically
generated or retained, provided that the resulting form is legible; there is no change to
the name, content, or sequence of the data elements and instructions; no additional data
elements or language are inserted; and the standards specified under 8 CFR 274a.2(e), (f),
(g), (h), and (i), as applicable, are met. When copying or printing the paper Form I-9, the
text of the two-sided form may be reproduced by making either double-sided or single-sided
copies.

(3) Attestation Under Penalty and Perjury. In conjunction with completing the Form I-9, an
employer or recruiter or referrer for a fee must examine documents that evidence the
identity and employment authorization of the individual. The employer or recruiter or
referrer for a fee and the individual must each complete an attestation on the Form I-9
under penalty of perjury.

(b) Employment verification requirements—(1) Examination of documents and completion of Form
I-9. (i) A person or entity that hires or recruits or refers for a fee an individual for
employment must ensure that the individual properly:

(A) Completes section 1—“Employee Information and Verification”—on the Form I-9 at the time
of hire and signs the attestation with a handwritten or electronic signature in accordance
with paragraph (h) of this section; or if an individual is unable to complete the Form I-9
or needs it translated, someone may assist him or her. The preparer or translator must read
the Form I-9 to the individual, assist him or her in completing Section 1—“Employee
Information and Verification,” and have the individual sign or mark the Form I-9 by a
handwritten signature, or an electronic signature in accordance with paragraph (h) of this
section, in the appropriate place; and

(B) Present to the employer or the recruiter or referrer for a fee documentation as set
forth in paragraph (b)(1)(v) of this section establishing his or her identity and employment
authorization within the time limits set forth in paragraphs (b)(1)(ii) through (b)(1)(v) of
this section.

(ii) Except as provided in paragraph (b)(1)(viii) of this section, an employer, his or her
agent, or anyone acting directly or indirectly in the interest thereof, must within three
business days of the hire:

(A) Physically examine (or otherwise examine pursuant to an alternative procedure authorized
by the Secretary under paragraph (b)(1)(ix) of this section) the documentation presented by
the individual establishing identity and employment authorization as set forth in paragraph
(b)(1)(v) of this section and ensure that the documents presented appear to be genuine and
to relate to the individual; and

(B) Complete section 2—“Employer Review and Verification”—on the Form I-9 within three
business days of the hire and sign the attestation with a handwritten signature or
electronic signature in accordance with paragraph (i) of this section.

(iii) An employer who hires an individual for employment for a duration of less than three
business days must comply with paragraphs (b)(1)(ii)(A) and (b)(1)(ii)(B) of this section at
the time of the hire. An employer may not accept a receipt, as described in paragraph
(b)(1)(vi) of this section, in lieu of the required document if the employment is for less
than three business days.

(iv) A recruiter or referrer for a fee for employment must comply with paragraphs
(b)(1)(ii)(A) and (b)(1)(ii)(B) of this section within three business days of the date the
referred individual is hired by the employer. Recruiters and referrers may designate agents
to complete the employment verification procedures on their behalf including but not limited
to notaries, national associations, or employers. If a recruiter or referrer designates an
employer to complete the employment verification procedures, the employer need only provide
the recruiter or referrer with a photocopy or printed electronic image of the Form I-9,
electronic Form I-9, or a Form I-9 on microfilm or microfiche.

(v) The individual may present either an original document which establishes both employment
authorization and identity, or an original document which establishes employment
authorization and a separate original document which establishes identity. Only unexpired
documents are acceptable. The identification number and expiration date (if any) of all
documents must be noted in the appropriate space provided on the Form I-9.

(A) The following documents, so long as they appear to relate to the individual presenting
the document, are acceptable to evidence both identity and employment authorization:

(1) A United States passport;

(2) An Alien Registration Receipt Card or Permanent Resident Card (Form I-551);

(3) A foreign passport that contains a temporary I-551 stamp, or temporary I-551 printed
notation on a machine-readable immigrant visa;

(4) An Employment Authorization Document which contains a photograph (Form I-766);

(5) In the case of an individual who is employment-authorized incident to status or parole
with a specific employer, a foreign passport with an Arrival/Departure Record, Form I-94 (as
defined in 8 CFR 1.4) or Form I-94A, bearing the same name as the passport and containing an
endorsement by DHS indicating such employment-authorized status or parole, as long as the
period of endorsement has not yet expired and the employment is not in conflict with the
individual's employment-authorized status or parole;

(6) A passport from the Federated States of Micronesia (FSM) or the Republic of the Marshall
Islands (RMI) with Form I-94 or Form I-94A indicating nonimmigrant admission under the
Compact of Free Association Between the United States and the FSM or RMI;

(7) In the case of an individual lawfully enlisted for military service in the Armed Forces
under 10 U.S.C. 504, a military identification card issued to such individual may be
accepted only by the Armed Forces.

(B) The following documents are acceptable to establish identity only:

(1) For individuals 16 years of age or older:

(i) A driver's license or identification card containing a photograph, issued by a state (as
defined in section 101(a)(36) of the Act) or an outlying possession of the United States (as
defined by section 101(a)(29) of the Act). If the driver's license or identification card
does not contain a photograph, identifying information shall be included such as: name, date
of birth, sex, height, color of eyes, and address;

(ii) School identification card with a photograph;

(iii) Voter's registration card;

(vi) U.S. military card or draft record;

(v) Identification card issued by federal, state, or local government agencies or entities.
If the identification card does not contain a photograph, identifying information shall be
included such as: name, date of birth, sex, height, color of eyes, and address;

(vi) Military dependent's identification card;

(vii) Native American tribal documents;

(viii) United States Coast Guard Merchant Mariner Card;

(ix) Driver's license issued by a Canadian government authority;

(2) For individuals under age 18 who are unable to produce a document listed in paragraph
(b)(1)(v)(B)(1) of this section, the following documents are acceptable to establish
identity only:

(i) School record or report card;

(ii) Clinic doctor or hospital record;

(iii) Daycare or nursery school record.

(3) Minors under the age of 18 who are unable to produce one of the identity documents
listed in paragraph (b)(1)(v)(B) (1) or (2) of this section are exempt from producing one of
the enumerated identity documents if:

(i) The minor's parent or legal guardian completes on the Form I-9 Section 1—“Employee
Information and Verification” and in the space for the minor's signature, the parent or
legal guardian writes the words, “minor under age 18.”

(ii) The minor's parent or legal guardian completes on the Form I-9 the “Preparer/Translator
certification.”

(iii) The employer or the recruiter or referrer for a fee writes in Section 2—“Employer
Review and Verification” under List B in the space after the words “Document Identification
#” the words, “minor under age 18.”

(4) Individuals with handicaps, who are unable to produce one of the identity documents
listed in paragraph (b)(1)(v)(B) (1) or (2) of this section, who are being placed into
employment by a nonprofit organization, association or as part of a rehabilitation program,
may follow the procedures for establishing identity provided in this section for minors
under the age of 18, substituting where appropriate, the term “special placement” for “minor
under age 18”, and permitting, in addition to a parent or legal guardian, a representative
from the nonprofit organization, association or rehabilitation program placing the
individual into a position of employment, to fill out and sign in the appropriate section,
the Form I-9. For purposes of this section the term individual with handicaps means any
person who

(i) Has a physical or mental impairment which substantially limits one or more of such
person's major life activities,

(ii) Has a record of such impairment, or

(iii) Is regarded as having such impairment.

(C) The following are acceptable documents to establish employment authorization only:

(1) A Social Security account number card other than one that specifies on the face that the
issuance of the card does not authorize employment in the United States;

(2) Certification or report of birth issued by the Department of State, including Forms
FS-545, DS-1350, FS-240;

(3) An original or certified copy of a birth certificate issued by a State, county,
municipal authority or outlying possession of the United States bearing an official seal;

(4) Native American tribal document;

(5) United States Citizen Identification Card, Form I-197;

(6) Identification card for use of resident citizen in the United States, Form I-179;

(7) An employment authorization document issued by the Department of Homeland Security.

(D) The following are acceptable documents to establish both identity and employment
authorization in the Commonwealth of the Northern Mariana Islands only, for a two-year
period starting from the transition program effective date (as defined in 8 CFR 1.1), in
addition to those documents listed in paragraph (b)(1)(v)(A) of this section:

(1) In the case of an alien with employment authorization in the Commonwealth of the
Northern Mariana Islands incident to status for a period of up to two years following the
transition program effective date that is unrestricted or otherwise authorizes a change of
employer:

(i) The unexpired foreign passport and an Alien Entry Permit with red band issued to the
alien by the Office of the Attorney General, Division of Immigration of the Commonwealth of
the Northern Mariana Islands before the transition program effective date, as long as the
period of employment authorization has not yet expired, or

(ii) An unexpired foreign passport and temporary work authorization letter issued by the
Department of Labor of the Commonwealth of the Northern Mariana Islands before the
transition program effective date, and containing the name and photograph of the individual,
as long as the period of employment authorization has not yet expired and the proposed
employment is not in conflict with any restrictions or limitations identified on the
Temporary Work Authorization letter;

(iii) An unexpired foreign passport and a permanent resident card issued by the Commonwealth
of the Northern Mariana Islands.

(2) [Reserved]

(vi) Special rules for receipts. Except as provided in paragraph (b)(1)(iii) of this
section, unless the individual indicates or the employer or recruiter or referrer for a fee
has actual or constructive knowledge that the individual is not authorized to work, an
employer or recruiter or referrer for a fee must accept a receipt for the application for a
replacement document or a document described in paragraphs (b)(1)(vi)(B)(1) and
(b)(1)(vi)(C)(1) of this section in lieu of the required document in order to comply with
any requirement to examine documentation imposed by this section, in the following
circumstances:

(A) Application for a replacement document. The individual:

(1) Is unable to provide the required document within the time specified in this section
because the document was lost, stolen, or damaged;

(2) Presents a receipt for the application for the replacement document within the time
specified in this section; and

(3) Presents the replacement document within 90 days of the hire or, in the case of
reverification, the date employment authorization expires; or

(B) Form I-94 or I-94A indicating temporary evidence of permanent resident status. The
individual indicates in section 1 of the Form I-9 that he or she is a lawful permanent
resident and the individual:

(1) Presents the arrival portion of Form I-94 or Form I-94A containing an unexpired
“Temporary I-551” stamp and a photograph of the individual, which is designated for purposes
of this section as a receipt for Form I-551; and

(2) Presents the Form I-551 by the expiration date of the “Temporary I-551” stamp or, if the
stamp has no expiration date, within one year from the issuance date of the arrival portion
of the Form I-94 or Form I-94A; or

(C) Form I-94 or I-94A indicating refugee status. The individual indicates in section 1 of
the Form I-9 that he or she is an alien authorized to work and the individual:

(1) Presents the departure portion of Form I-94 or I-94A containing an unexpired refugee
admission stamp, which is designated for purposes of this section as a receipt for the Form
I-766, or a social security account number card that contains no employment restrictions;
and

(2) Presents, within 90 days of the hire or, in the case of reverification, the date
employment authorization expires, either an unexpired Form I-766, or a social security
account number card that contains no employment restrictions and a document described under
paragraph (b)(1)(v)(B) of this section.

(vii) If an individual's employment authorization expires, the employer, recruiter or
referrer for a fee must reverify on the Form I-9 to reflect that the individual is still
authorized to work in the United States; otherwise, the individual may no longer be
employed, recruited, or referred. Reverification on the Form I-9 must occur not later than
the date work authorization expires and must comply with the applicable document
presentation and examination procedures in paragraphs (b)(1)(ii)(A) and (b)(1)(ix) of this
section, and form instructions. If an Employment Authorization Document (Form I-766) as
described in 8 CFR 274a.13(d) was presented for completion of the Form I-9 in combination
with a Notice of Action (Form I-797C), stating that the original Employment Authorization
Document has been automatically extended, reverification applies upon the expiration of the
automatically extended validity period under 8 CFR 274a.13(d) and not upon the expiration
date indicated on the face of the individual's Employment Authorization Document. In order
to reverify on the Form I-9, the employee or referred individual must present a document
that either shows continuing employment eligibility or is a new grant of work authorization.
The employer or the recruiter or referrer for a fee must review this document, and if it
appears to be genuine and relate to the individual, reverify by noting the document's
identification number and expiration date, if any, on the Form I-9 and signing the
attestation by a handwritten signature or electronic signature in accordance with paragraph
(i) of this section.

(viii) An employer will not be deemed to have hired an individual for employment if the
individual is continuing in his or her employment and has a reasonable expectation of
employment at all times.

(A) An individual is continuing in his or her employment in one of the following situations:

(1) An individual takes approved paid or unpaid leave on account of study, illness or
disability of a family member, illness or pregnancy, maternity or paternity leave, vacation,
union business, or other temporary leave approved by the employer;

(2) An individual is promoted, demoted, or gets a pay raise;

(3) An individual is temporarily laid off for lack of work;

(4) An individual is on strike or in a labor dispute;

(5) An individual is reinstated after disciplinary suspension for wrongful termination,
found unjustified by any court, arbitrator, or administrative body, or otherwise resolved
through reinstatement or settlement;

(6) An individual transfers from one distinct unit of an employer to another distinct unit
of the same employer; the employer may transfer the individual's Form I-9 to the receiving
unit;

(7) An individual continues his or her employment with a related, successor, or reorganized
employer, provided that the employer obtains and maintains from the previous employer
records and Forms I-9 where applicable. For this purpose, a related, successor, or
reorganized employer includes:

(i) The same employer at another location;

(ii) An employer who continues to employ some or all of a previous employer's workforce in
cases involving a corporate reorganization, merger, or sale of stock or assets;

(iii) An employer who continues to employ any employee of another employer's workforce where
both employers belong to the same multi-employer association and the employee continues to
work in the same bargaining unit under the same collective bargaining agreement. For
purposes of this subsection, any agent designated to complete and maintain the Form I-9 must
record the employee's date of hire and/or termination each time the employee is hired and/or
terminated by an employer of the multi-employer association; or

(8) An individual is engaged in seasonal employment.

(B) The employer who is claiming that an individual is continuing in his or her employment
must also establish that the individual expected to resume employment at all times and that
the individual's expectation is reasonable. Whether an individual's expectation is
reasonable will be determined on a case-by-case basis taking into consideration several
factors. Factors which would indicate that an individual has a reasonable expectation of
employment include, but are not limited to, the following:

(1) The individual in question was employed by the employer on a regular and substantial
basis. A determination of a regular and substantial basis is established by a comparison of
other workers who are similarly employed by the employer;

(2) The individual in question complied with the employer's established and published policy
regarding his or her absence;

(3) The employer's past history of recalling absent employees for employment indicates a
likelihood that the individual in question will resume employment with the employer within a
reasonable time in the future;

(4) The former position held by the individual in question has not been taken permanently by
another worker;

(5) The individual in question has not sought or obtained benefits during his or her absence
from employment with the employer that are inconsistent with an expectation of resuming
employment with the employer within a reasonable time in the future. Such benefits include,
but are not limited to, severance and retirement benefits;

(6) The financial condition of the employer indicates the ability of the employer to permit
the individual in question to resume employment within a reasonable time in the future; or

(7) The oral and/or written communication between employer, the employer's supervisory
employees and the individual in question indicates that it is reasonably likely that the
individual in question will resume employment with the employer within a reasonable time in
the future.

(ix) As an optional alternative to the physical examination procedure described in paragraph
(b)(1)(ii)(A) of this section, the Secretary may, consistent with applicable law and via
notice published in the Federal Register, authorize alternative documentation examination
procedures with respect to some or all employers. The Secretary may adopt such procedures:

(A) As part of a pilot program;

(B) Upon the Secretary's determination that such procedures offer an equivalent level of
security to that of physical examination as indicated by, for instance, observed measures of
system integrity (such as error or fraud rates) or the procedure's capacity for confirming
certain documents or information; or

(C) As a temporary measure to address a public health emergency declared by the Secretary of
Health and Human Services pursuant to Section 319 of the Public Health Service Act, or a
national emergency declared by the President pursuant to Sections 201 and 301 of the
National Emergencies Act.

(2) Retention and Inspection of Form I-9. (i) A paper (with original handwritten
signatures), electronic (with acceptable electronic signatures that meet the requirements of
paragraphs (h) and (i) of this section or original paper scanned into an electronic format,
or a combination of paper and electronic formats that meet the requirements of paragraphs
(e), (f), and (g) of this section), or microfilm or microfiche copy of the original signed
version of Form I-9 must be retained by an employer or a recruiter or referrer for a fee for
the following time periods:

(A) In the case of an employer, three years after the date of the hire or one year after the
date the individual's employment is terminated, whichever is later; or

(B) In the case of a recruiter or referrer for a fee, three years after the date of the
hire.

(ii) Any person or entity required to retain Forms I-9 in accordance with this section shall
be provided with at least three business days notice prior to an inspection of Forms I-9 by
officers of an authorized agency of the United States. At the time of inspection, Forms I-9
must be made available in their original paper, electronic form, a paper copy of the
electronic form, or on microfilm or microfiche at the location where the request for
production was made. If Forms I-9 are kept at another location, the person or entity must
inform the officer of the authorized agency of the United States of the location where the
forms are kept and make arrangements for the inspection. Inspections may be performed at an
office of an authorized agency of the United States. A recruiter or referrer for a fee who
has designated an employer to complete the employment verification procedures may present a
photocopy or printed electronic image of the Form I-9 in lieu of presenting the Form I-9 in
its original paper or electronic form or on microfilm or microfiche, as set forth in
paragraph (b)(1)(iv) of this section. Any refusal or delay in presentation of the Forms I-9
for inspection is a violation of the retention requirements as set forth in section
274A(b)(3) of the Act. No Subpoena or warrant shall be required for such inspection, but the
use of such enforcement tools is not precluded. In addition, if the person or entity has not
complied with a request to present the Forms I-9, any officer listed in 8 CFR 287.4 may
compel production of the Forms I-9 and any other relevant documents by issuing a subpoena.
Nothing in this section is intended to limit the subpoena power under section 235(d)(4) of
the Act.

(iii) The following standards shall apply to Forms I-9 presented on microfilm or microfiche
submitted to an officer of the Service, the Special Counsel for Immigration-Related Unfair
Employment Practices, or the Department of Labor: Microfilm, when displayed on a microfilm
reader (viewer) or reproduced on paper must exhibit a high degree of legibility and
readability. For this purpose, legibility is defined as the quality of a letter or numeral
which enables the observer to positively and quickly identify it to the exclusion of all
other letters or numerals. Readability is defined as the quality of a group of letters or
numerals being recognizable as words or whole numbers. A detailed index of all microfilmed
data shall be maintained and arranged in such a manner as to permit the immediate location
of any particular record. It is the responsibility of the employer, recruiter or referrer
for a fee:

(A) To provide for the processing, storage and maintenance of all microfilm, and

(B) To be able to make the contents thereof available as required by law. The person or
entity presenting the microfilm will make available a reader-printer at the examination site
for the ready reading, location and reproduction of any record or records being maintained
on microfilm. Reader-printers made available to an officer of the Service, the Special
Counsel for Immigration-Related Unfair Employment Practices, or the Department of Labor
shall provide safety features and be in clean condition, properly maintained and in good
working order. The reader-printers must have the capacity to display and print a complete
page of information. A person or entity who is determined to have failed to comply with the
criteria established by this regulation for the presentation of microfilm or microfiche to
the Service, the Special Counsel for Immigration-Related Unfair Employment Practices, or the
Department of Labor, and at the time of the inspection does not present a properly completed
Form I-9 for the employee, is in violation of section 274A(a)(1)(B) of the Act and §
274a.2(b)(2).

(iv) Paragraphs (e), (f), (g), (h), and (i) of this section specify the standards for
electronic Forms I-9.

(3) Copying of documentation. An employer, or a recruiter or referrer for a fee may, but is
not required to, copy or make an electronic image of a document presented by an individual
solely for the purpose of complying with the verification requirements of this section. If
such a copy or electronic image is made, it must either be retained with the Form I-9 or
stored with the employee's records and be retrievable consistent with paragraphs (e), (f),
(g), (h), and (i) of this section. The copying or electronic imaging of any such document
and retention of the copy or electronic image does not relieve the employer from the
requirement to fully complete section 2 of the Form I-9. An employer, recruiter or referrer
for a fee should not, however, copy or electronically image only the documents of
individuals of certain national origins or citizenship statuses. To do so may violate
section 274B of the Act.

(4) Limitation on use of Form I-9. Any information contained in or appended to the Form I-9,
including copies or electronic images of documents listed in paragraph (c) of this section
used to verify an individual's identity or employment eligibility, may be used only for
enforcement of the Act and sections 1001, 1028, 1546, or 1621 of title 18, United States
Code.

(c) Employment verification requirements in the case of hiring an individual who was
previously employed. (1) When an employer hires an individual whom that person or entity has
previously employed, if the employer has previously completed the Form I-9 and complied with
the verification requirements set forth in paragraph (b) of this section with regard to the
individual, the employer may (in lieu of completing a new Form I-9) inspect the previously
completed Form I-9 and:

(i) If upon inspection of the Form I-9, the employer determines that the Form I-9 relates to
the individual and that the individual is still eligible to work, that previously executed
Form I-9 is sufficient for purposes of section 274A(b) of the Act if the individual is hired
within three years of the date of the initial execution of the Form I-9 and the employer
updates the Form I-9 to reflect the date of rehire; or

(ii) If upon inspection of the Form I-9, the employer determines that the individual's
employment authorization has expired, the employer must reverify such employment
authorization on the Form I-9 in accordance with paragraph (b)(1)(vii) of this section,
including complying with the applicable document presentation and examination procedures in
paragraphs (b)(1)(ii)(A) and (b)(1)(ix) of this section, and form instructions; otherwise
the individual may no longer be employed.

(2) For purposes of retention of the Form I-9 by an employer for a previously employed
individual hired pursuant to paragraph (c)(1) of this section, the employer shall retain the
Form I-9 for a period of three years commencing from the date of the initial execution of
the Form I-9 or one year after the individual's employment is terminated, whichever is
later.

(d) Employment verification requirements in the case of recruiting or referring for a fee an
individual who was previously recruited or referred. (1) When a recruiter or referrer for a
fee refers an individual for whom that recruiter or referrer for a fee has previously
completed a Form I-9 and complied with the verification requirements set forth in paragraph
(b) of this section with regard to the individual, the recruiter or referrer may (in lieu of
completing a new Form I-9) inspect the previously completed Form I-9 and:

(i) If upon inspection of the Form I-9, the recruiter or referrer for a fee determines that
the Form I-9 relates to the individual and that the individual is still eligible to work,
that previously executed Form I-9 is sufficient for purposes of section 274A(b) of the Act
if the individual is referred within three years of the date of the initial execution of the
Form I-9 and the recruiter or referrer for a fee updates the Form I-9 to reflect the date of
rehire; or

(ii) If upon inspection of the Form I-9, the recruiter or referrer determines that the
individual's employment authorization has expired, the recruiter or referrer for a fee must
reverify on the Form I-9 in accordance with paragraph (b)(1)(vii) of this section; otherwise
the individual may no longer be recruited or referred.

(2) For purposes of retention of the Form I-9 by a recruiter or referrer for a previously
recruited or referred individual pursuant to paragraph (d)(1) of this section, the recruiter
or referrer shall retain the Form I-9 for a period of three years from the date of the
rehire.

(e) Standards for electronic retention of Form I-9. (1) Any person or entity who is required
by this section to complete and retain Forms I-9 may complete or retain electronically only
those pages of the Form I-9 on which employers and employees enter data in an electronic
generation or storage system that includes:

(i) Reasonable controls to ensure the integrity, accuracy and reliability of the electronic
generation or storage system;

(ii) Reasonable controls designed to prevent and detect the unauthorized or accidental
creation of, addition to, alteration of, deletion of, or deterioration of an electronically
completed or stored Form I-9, including the electronic signature if used;

(iii) An inspection and quality assurance program evidenced by regular evaluations of the
electronic generation or storage system, including periodic checks of the electronically
stored Form I-9, including the electronic signature if used;

(iv) In the case of electronically retained Forms I-9, a retrieval system that includes an
indexing system that permits searches consistent with the requirements of paragraph (e)(6)
of this section; and

(v) The ability to reproduce legible and readable hardcopies.

(2) All documents reproduced by the electronic retention system must exhibit a high degree
of legibility and readability when displayed on a video display terminal or when printed on
paper, microfilm, or microfiche. The term “legibility” means the observer must be able to
identify all letters and numerals positively and quickly, to the exclusion of all other
letters or numerals. The term “readability” means that the observer must be able to
recognize any group of letters or numerals that form words or numbers as those words or
complete numbers. The employer, or recruiter or referrer for a fee, must ensure that the
reproduction process maintains the legibility and readability of the electronically stored
document.

(3) An electronic generation or storage system must not be subject, in whole or in part, to
any agreement (such as a contract or license) that would limit or restrict access to and use
of the electronic generation or storage system by an agency of the United States, on the
premises of the employer, recruiter or referrer for a fee (or at any other place where the
electronic generation or storage system is maintained), including personnel, hardware,
software, files, indexes, and software documentation.

(4) A person or entity who chooses to complete or retain Forms I-9 electronically may use
one or more electronic generation or storage systems. Each electronic generation or storage
system must meet the requirements of this paragraph, and remain available as long as
required by the Act and these regulations. Employers may implement new electronic storage
systems provided:

(i) All systems meet the requirements of paragraphs (e), (f), (g), (h) and (i) of this
section; and

(ii) Existing Forms I-9 are retained in a system that remains fully accessible.

(5) For each electronic generation or storage system used, the person or entity retaining
the Form I-9 must maintain, and make available upon request, complete descriptions of:

(i) The electronic generation and storage system, including all procedures relating to its
use; and

(ii) The indexing system.

(6) An “indexing system” for the purposes of paragraphs (e)(1)(iv) and (e)(5) of this
section is a system that permits the identification and retrieval for viewing or reproducing
of relevant documents and records maintained in an electronic storage system. For example,
an indexing system might consist of assigning each electronically stored document a unique
identification number and maintaining a separate database that contains descriptions of all
electronically stored books and records along with their identification numbers. In
addition, any system used to maintain, organize, or coordinate multiple electronic storage
systems is treated as an indexing system. The requirement to maintain an indexing system
will be satisfied if the indexing system is functionally comparable to a reasonable hardcopy
filing system. The requirement to maintain an indexing system does not require that a
separate electronically stored documents and records description database be maintained if
comparable results can be achieved without a separate description database.

(7) Any person or entity choosing to retain completed Forms I-9 electronically may use
reasonable data compression or formatting technologies as part of the electronic storage
system as long as the requirements of 8 CFR 274a.2 are satisfied.

(8) At the time of an inspection, the person or entity required to retain completed Forms
I-9 must:

(i) Retrieve and reproduce (including printing copies on paper, if requested) only the Forms
I-9 electronically retained in the electronic storage system and supporting documentation
specifically requested by an agency of the United States, along with associated audit
trails. Generally, an audit trail is a record showing who has accessed a computer system and
the actions performed within or on the computer system during a given period of time;

(ii) Provide a requesting agency of the United States with the resources (e.g., appropriate
hardware and software, personnel and documentation) necessary to locate, retrieve, read, and
reproduce (including paper copies) any electronically stored Forms I-9, any supporting
documents, and their associated audit trails, reports, and other data used to maintain the
authenticity, integrity, and reliability of the records; and

(iii) Provide, if requested, any reasonably available or obtainable electronic summary
file(s), such as a spreadsheet, containing all of the information fields on all of the
electronically stored Forms I-9 requested by a requesting agency of the United States.

(f) Documentation. (1) A person or entity who chooses to complete and/or retain Forms I-9
electronically must maintain and make available to an agency of the United States upon
request documentation of the business processes that:

(i) Create the retained Forms I-9;

(ii) Modify and maintain the retained Forms I-9; and

(iii) Establish the authenticity and integrity of the Forms I-9, such as audit trails.

(2) Insufficient or incomplete documentation is a violation of section 274A(a)(1)(B) of the
Act.

(3) Any officer listed in 8 CFR 287.4 may issue a subpoena to compel production of any
documentation required by 8 CFR 274a.2. Nothing in this section is intended to limit the
subpoena power of an agency of the United States under section 235(d)(4) of the Act.

(g) Security. (1) Any person or entity who elects to complete or retain Forms I-9
electronically must implement an effective records security program that:

(i) Ensures that only authorized personnel have access to electronic records;

(ii) Provides for backup and recovery of records to protect against information loss, such
as power interruptions;

(iii) Ensures that employees are trained to minimize the risk of unauthorized or accidental
alteration or erasure of electronic records; and

(iv) Ensure that whenever the electronic record is created, completed, updated, modified,
altered, or corrected, a secure and permanent record is created that establishes the date of
access, the identity of the individual who accessed the electronic record, and the
particular action taken.

(2) An action or inaction resulting in the unauthorized alteration, loss, or erasure of
electronic records, if it is known, or reasonably should be known, to be likely to have that
effect, is a violation of section 274A(b)(3) of the Act.

(h) Electronic signatures for employee. (1) If a Form I-9 is completed electronically, the
attestations in Form I-9 must be completed using a system for capturing an electronic
signature that meets the standards set forth in this paragraph. The system used to capture
the electronic signature must include a method to acknowledge that the attestation to be
signed has been read by the signatory. The electronic signature must be attached to, or
logically associated with, an electronically completed Form I-9. In addition, the system
must:

(i) Affix the electronic signature at the time of the transaction;

(ii) Create and preserve a record verifying the identity of the person producing the
signature; and

(iii) Upon request of the employee, provide a printed confirmation of the transaction to the
person providing the signature.

(2) Any person or entity who is required to ensure proper completion of a Form I-9 and who
chooses electronic signature for a required attestation, but who has failed to comply with
the standards set forth in this paragraph, is deemed to have not properly completed the Form
I-9, in violation of section 274A(a)(1)(B) of the Act and 8 CFR 274a.2(b)(2).

(i) Electronic signatures for employer, recruiter or referrer, or representative. If a Form
I-9 is completed electronically, the employer, the recruiter or referrer for a fee, or the
representative of the employer or the recruiter or referrer, must attest to the required
information in Form I-9. The system used to capture the electronic signature should include
a method to acknowledge that the attestation to be signed has been read by the signatory.
Any person or entity who has failed to comply with the criteria established by this
regulation for electronic signatures, if used, and at the time of inspection does not
present a properly completed Form I-9 for the employee, is in violation of section
274A(a)(1)(B) of the Act and 8 CFR 274a.2(b)(2).


----------------------------------------------------------------------


§ 274a.10 Penalties.
--------------------

(a) Criminal penalties. Any person or entity which engages in a pattern or practice of
violations of subsection (a)(1)(A) or (a)(2) of the Act shall be fined not more than $3,000
for each unauthorized alien, imprisoned for not more than six months for the entire pattern
or practice, or both, notwithstanding the provisions of any other Federal law relating to
fine levels.

(b) Civil penalties. A person or entity may face civil penalties for a violation of section
274A of the Act. Civil penalties may be imposed by the Service or an administrative law
judge for violations under section 274A of the Act. In determining the level of the
penalties that will be imposed, a finding of more than one violation in the course of a
single proceeding or determination will be counted as a single offense. However, a single
offense will include penalties for each unauthorized alien who is determined to have been
knowingly hired or recruited or referred for a fee.

(1) A respondent found by the Service or an administrative law judge to have knowingly
hired, or to have knowingly recruited or referred for a fee, an unauthorized alien for
employment in the United States or to have knowingly continued to employ an unauthorized
alien in the United States, shall be subject to the following order:

(i) To cease and desist from such behavior;

(ii) To pay a civil fine according to the following schedule:

(A) First offense—not less than $275 and not more than $2,200 for each unauthorized alien
with respect to whom the offense occurred before March 27, 2008; not less than $375 and not
exceeding $3,200, for each unauthorized alien with respect to whom the offense occurred
occurring on or after March 27, 2008, and on or before November 2, 2015; and not less than
$716 and not more than $5,724 for each unauthorized alien with respect to whom the offense
occurred occurring after November 2, 2015;

(B) Second offense—not less than $2,200 and not more than $5,500 for each unauthorized alien
with respect to whom the second offense occurred before March 27, 2008; not less than $3,200
and not more than $6,500, for each unauthorized alien with respect to whom the second
offense occurred on or after March 27, 2008, and on or before November 2, 2015; and not less
than $5,724 and not more than $14,308 for each unauthorized alien with respect to whom the
second offense occurred after November 2, 2015; or

(C) More than two offenses—not less than $3,300 and not more than $11,000 for each
unauthorized alien with respect to whom the third or subsequent offense occurred before
March 27, 2008; not less than $4,300 and not exceeding $16,000, for each unauthorized alien
with respect to whom the third or subsequent offense occurred on or after March 27, 2008,
and on or before November 2, 2015; and not less than $8,586 and not more than $28,619 for
each unauthorized alien with respect to whom the third or subsequent offense occurred after
November 2, 2015; and

(iii) To comply with the requirements of section 274a.2(b) of this part, and to take such
other remedial action as is appropriate.

(2) A respondent determined by the Service (if a respondent fails to request a hearing) or
by an administrative law judge, to have failed to comply with the employment verification
requirements as set forth in § 274a.2(b), shall be subject to a civil penalty in an amount
of not less than $100 and not more than $1,000 for each individual with respect to whom such
violation occurred before September 29, 1999; not less than $110 and not more than $1,100
for each individual with respect to whom such violation occurred on or after September 29,
1999, and on or before November 2, 2015; and not less than $288 and not more than $2,861 for
each individual with respect to whom such violation occurred after November 2, 2015. In
determining the amount of the penalty, consideration shall be given to:

(i) The size of the business of the employer being charged;

(ii) The good faith of the employer;

(iii) The seriousness of the violation;

(iv) Whether or not the individual was an unauthorized alien; and

(v) The history of previous violations of the employer.

(3) Where an order is issued with respect to a respondent composed of distinct, physically
separate subdivisions which do their own hiring, or their own recruiting or referring for a
fee for employment (without reference to the practices of, and under the control of, or
common control with another subdivision) the subdivision shall be considered a separate
person or entity.

(c) Enjoining pattern or practice violations. If the Attorney General has reasonable cause
to believe that a person or entity is engaged in a pattern or practice of employment,
recruitment or referral in violation of section 274A(a)(1)(A) or (2) of the Act, the
Attorney General may bring civil action in the appropriate United States District Court
requesting relief, including a permanent or temporary injunction, restraining order, or
other order against the person or entity, as the Attorney General deems necessary.


----------------------------------------------------------------------


§ 274a.13 Application for employment authorization.
---------------------------------------------------

(a) Application. An alien requesting employment authorization or an Employment Authorization
Document (Form I-766), or both, may be required to apply on a form designated by USCIS with
any prescribed fee(s) in accordance with the form instructions. An alien may file such
request concurrently with a related benefit request that, if granted, would form the basis
for eligibility for employment authorization, only to the extent permitted by the form
instructions or as announced by USCIS on its Web site.

(1) The approval of applications filed under 8 CFR 274a.12(c), except for 8 CFR
274a.12(c)(8), are within the discretion of USCIS. Where economic necessity has been
identified as a factor, the alien must provide information regarding his or her assets,
income, and expenses.

(2) An initial employment authorization request for asylum applicants under 8 CFR
274a.12(c)(8) must be filed on the form designated by USCIS in accordance with the form
instructions. The applicant also must submit a copy of the underlying application for asylum
or withholding of deportation, together with evidence that the application has been filed in
accordance with 8 CFR 208.3 and 208.4. An application for an initial employment
authorization or for a renewal of employment authorization filed in relation to a pending
claim for asylum shall be adjudicated in accordance with 8 CFR 208.7. An application for
renewal or replacement of employment authorization submitted in relation to a pending claim
for asylum, as provided in 8 CFR 208.7, must be filed, with fee or application for waiver of
such fee.

(b) Approval of application. If the application is granted, the alien shall be notified of
the decision and issued an employment authorization document valid for a specific period and
subject to any terms and conditions as noted.

(c) Denial of application. If the application is denied, the applicant shall be notified in
writing of the decision and the reasons for the denial. There shall be no appeal from the
denial of the application.

(d) Renewal application filed before October 30, 2025—(1) Automatic extension of Employment
Authorization Documents. Except as otherwise provided in this chapter or by law,
notwithstanding § 274a.14(a)(1)(i), the validity period of an expired or expiring Employment
Authorization Document (Form I-766) and, for aliens who are not employment authorized
incident to status, also the attendant employment authorization, will be automatically
extended for an additional period not to exceed 540 days if the request for renewal meets
all of the criteria listed in paragraphs (d)(1)(i) through (iii) of this section and was
pending on May 4, 2022, or was properly filed on or after May 4, 2022. For renewal
applications properly filed and adjudicated before May 4, 2022, the validity period of such
an expired or expiring Employment Authorization Document (Form I-766) and, for aliens who
were not employment authorized incident to status, also the attendant employment
authorization, was automatically extended for an additional period not to exceed 180 days if
the request for renewal met all of the criteria listed in paragraphs (d)(1)(i) through (iii)
of this section. The first day of the automatic extension under this paragraph is the day
after the expiration date shown on the face of the expired or expiring Employment
Authorization Document (Form I-766). To be eligible for the automatic extension under this
paragraph, the request must be:

(i) Properly filed on a form designated by USCIS and as provided by form instructions before
the expiration date shown on the face of the Employment Authorization Document, or, for
Temporary Protected Status-related Employment Authorization Documents (EADs), during the re-
registration filing period described in the applicable Federal Register notice;

(ii) Based on the same employment authorization category as shown on the face of the
expiring Employment Authorization Document or is for an individual approved for Temporary
Protected Status whose EAD was issued pursuant to 8 CFR 274a.12(c)(19); and

(iii) Based on a class of aliens whose eligibility to apply for employment authorization
continues notwithstanding expiration of the Employment Authorization Document and is based
on an employment authorization category that does not require adjudication of an underlying
application or petition before adjudication of the renewal application, including aliens
described in 8 CFR 274a.12(a)(12) granted Temporary Protected Status and pending applicants
for Temporary Protected Status who are issued an EAD under 8 CFR 274a.12(c)(19), as may be
announced on the USCIS Web site.

(2) Terms and conditions. Any extension authorized under this paragraph (d) shall be subject
to any conditions and limitations noted in the immediately preceding employment
authorization.

(3) Termination. For renewal requests pending on May 4, 2022, or properly filed on or after
May 4, 2022, the period authorized by paragraph (d)(1) of this section automatically
terminates the earlier of up to 540 days after the expiration date of the Employment
Authorization Document (Form I-766), or upon issuance of notification of a decision denying
the renewal request. For renewal applications that were properly filed and adjudicated
before May 4, 2022, the period authorized by paragraph (d)(1) of this section automatically
terminated upon the earlier of up to 180 days after the expiration date of the Employment
Authorization Document (Form I-766) or issuance of notification of a decision denying the
renewal request. Nothing in paragraph (d) of this section will affect DHS's ability to
otherwise terminate any employment authorization or Employment Authorization Document, or
extension period for such employment or document, by written notice to the applicant, by
notice to a class of aliens published in the Federal Register, or as provided by statute or
regulation including 8 CFR 274a.14.

(4) Unexpired Employment Authorization Documents. An Employment Authorization Document (Form
I-766) that has expired on its face is considered unexpired when combined with a Notice of
Action (Form I-797C), which demonstrates that the requirements of paragraph (d)(1) of this
section have been met.

(e) Renewal application filed on or after October 30, 2025. Except as otherwise provided by
law, paragraph (d) of this section, or in an applicable Federal Register notice regarding
procedures for renewing TPS-related employment documentation, the validity period of an
expired or expiring Employment Authorization Document and, for aliens who are not employment
authorized incident to status, also the attendant employment authorization, will not be
automatically extended by a request for renewal. An Employment Authorization Document and,
if applicable, the attendant employment authorization, will expire as follows:

(1) For aliens who are employment authorized incident to status pursuant to § 274a.12(a),
unless otherwise provided by law, the Employment Authorization Document will expire on the
day after the end validity date on the Employment Authorization Document. The employment
authorization will expire or terminate upon the expiration or termination of the alien's
status or circumstance.

(2) For aliens who are employment authorized pursuant to § 274a.12(c), the Employment
Authorization Document will expire, and the attendant employment authorization will
terminate, the day after the end validity date on the Employment Authorization Document,
pursuant to § 274a.14, or, for TPS applicants, pursuant to section 244 of the Act and 8 CFR
part 244.
