
Department of Justice Immigrant and Employee Rights Section - Guidance on the Form I-9 Process
==============================================================================================


LPR - Lawful Permanent Residents’ Employment Rights Under the Immigration and Nationality Act
---------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------

Source: https://www.justice.gov/crt/lawful-permanent-residents-employment-rights-under-
immigration-and-nationality-act

If you’re a lawful permanent resident, you have certain protections from employment
discrimination under the Immigration and Nationality Act. This fact sheet explains the
protections you have under this law from employment discrimination based on citizenship,
immigration status, and national origin in:

when proving your permission to work in the United States to an employer.

An employer that refuses to hire you, or fires you, because you’re a lawful permanent
resident or because of your national origin might be violating the law. Employers generally
cannot exclude lawful permanent residents, limit jobs only to U.S. citizens, or refuse to
hire someone because they were born in another country.

Protections When an Employer is Verifying Your Permission to Work

When you start a new job, employers must use the Form I-9 to verify your permission to work,
also known as your authorization to work. Some employers also use E-Verify . If an employer
treats you differently when verifying your permission to work based on your citizenship,
immigration status, or national origin, the employer might be violating the law. An employer
might be violating the law if it:

Asks you to prove your lawful permanent resident status or USCIS/A# for the Form I-9.

Asks you to show a specific document for the Form I‑9, such as your Permanent Resident Card
or “green card.”

Refuses to accept the valid documents you decide to show for the Form I-9.

Asks you to show more documentation than is necessary for the Form I-9.

Asks you to show documentation when not required. If you decide to show a valid Permanent
Resident Card when you start your job, your employer cannot ask you for a new document when
the Permanent Resident Card later expires.

Asks you for more documentation when using E‑Verify. Employers should enter information from
your Form I-9 when using E-Verify.

When an employer verifies your permission to work, you get to choose which acceptable
documentation to present. Your employer should not be deciding that for you.

View more Form I-9 information for lawful permanent residents.

Some examples of documents a lawful permanent resident can decide to show for the Form I-9

Permanent Resident Card – including cards extended past the expiration date on the card,
with an I-797 extension letter

Foreign passport with a Machine-Readable Immigrant Visa with an I‑551 notation

You’re also protected against retaliation. If you talk with the Civil Rights Division’s
Immigrant and Employee Rights Section (IER) about a work problem, file a complaint with IER,
take part in an investigation, or speak up to protect your rights or someone else’s rights,
an employer cannot use that to:

Call the Civil Rights Division’s Immigrant and Employee Rights Section if:

You see a job posting that limits hiring to U.S. citizens and you think there is no lawful
reason for it.

An employer does not hire you, or fires you, because you’re a lawful permanent resident, or
because of your national origin.

Your employer does not let you show the acceptable documentation of your choice when proving
your permission to work.

Your employer asks for documentation when not required. For example, if your current
employer asks for a new Permanent Resident Card when the card expires.

Your employer retaliates against you because you speak up for your right to work as
protected by this law.

Other federal or state laws may also prohibit discrimination based on citizenship,
immigration status, or national origin. For example, the Equal Employment Opportunity
Commission enforces an employment law that protects workers from national origin
discrimination.

Civil Rights Division, Immigrant and Employee Rights Section (IER)

Call the Worker Hotline at 1-800-255-7688 | 1-800-237-2515 TTY

Calls can be anonymous and free language services are available.

The law IER enforces is found at 8 U.S.C. § 1324b .

To learn more, visit https://www.justice.gov/ier


----------------------------------------------------------------------


I9-EV - Form I-9 And E-Verify
-----------------------------

Source: https://www.justice.gov/crt/form-i-9-and-e-verify

Employers verify each worker's identity and employment eligibility by completing the Form
I-9, Employment Eligibility Verification at the time of hire. U.S. Citizenship and
Immigration Services (USCIS), in the Department of Homeland Security (DHS), publishes the
Form I-9 and accompanying instructions. Some employers also use E-Verify, an electronic
system that compares a worker’s Form I-9 information with government databases to verify
employment eligibility.

Federal law requires employers to follow Form I-9 and E-Verify rules consistently,
regardless of an employee's citizenship, immigration status, or national origin. This anti-
discrimination law is found at 8 U.S.C. § 1324b. The regulations for this law are at 28
C.F.R. Part 44.

The Form I-9 instructions explain that employees can present any documentation from the
Lists of Acceptable Documents. At the time of hire, all employees can choose to present
either an unexpired List A document, or an unexpired List B document together with an
unexpired List C document. The Form I-9 instructions tell employers to accept all documents
that are sufficient to complete Form I-9 as long as they reasonably appear to be genuine and
to relate to the employee. For example, under the Lists of Acceptable Documents, attached to
the Form I-9, individuals may present a valid U.S. driver's license and unrestricted Social
Security card to satisfy Form I-9 requirements. Under the law that the Immigrant and
Employee Rights Section (IER) enforces, employers are not allowed to request more or
different documents than are required to establish a worker's identity and eligibility to
work in the United States, request a specific document or reject documents that appear to be
reasonably genuine on their face based on a worker's citizenship status or national origin.
You can learn more by contacting IER and at 8 U.S.C. § 1324b(a)(6). For example, under this
part of the law employers must not require lawful permanent residents to produce a Permanent
Resident, also known as a "green card," and must not require U.S. citizens who appear
"foreign" to produce a birth certificate. If the Form I-9 instructions require an employer
to reverify an employee the instructions allow the employee to present any valid List A
document or List C document for reverification.

Employers that participate in the E-Verify program must use E-Verify consistently and
without regard to an employee’s citizenship, immigration status, or national origin to avoid
violating 8 U.S.C. § 1324b or the E-Verify rules. Discrimination in the E-Verify process,
such as requiring a DHS-issued document from all non-U.S. citizens to create an E-Verify
case, violates 8 U.S.C. § 1324b and the E-Verify rules.

For further information about the Form I-9 and E-Verify requirements, including updates from
USCIS, visit I-9 Central and the E-Verify website.

Call IER if you are an employee and feel your employer has treated you differently during
the Form I-9 or E-Verify process based on your citizenship status or national origin, or if
you are an employer with questions about preventing discrimination in the employment
eligibility verification process:

Teletypewriter (TTY) for hearing impaired: 1-800-237-2515

Below are additional resources for workers and employers:

USCIS Employee Rights and Responsibilities Under E-Verify (also available in Spanish and
other languages)

Worker Protections Against Discrimination in the E-Verify Process

Identifying Possible E-Verify Related Employment Discrimination

E-Verify Employee Rights and Responsibilities Video

FOR EMPLOYERS IER's Employer Information web page

USCIS/IER/ICE Employer Responsibilities Webinar

IER Information for Employers on How to Avoid Discrimination in E-Verify

The information on this webpage is not intended to be a final agency action, has no legally
binding effect, and has no force or effect of law. This webpage may be rescinded or modified
at the Department’s discretion, in accordance with applicable laws. The Department’s
guidance documents, including this webpage, do not establish legally enforceable
responsibilities beyond what is required by the terms of the applicable statutes,
regulations, or binding judicial precedent. For more information, see "Memorandum for All
Components: Prohibition of Improper Guidance Documents," from Attorney General Jefferson B.
Sessions III, November 16, 2017.


----------------------------------------------------------------------


FAQ - IER's Frequently Asked Questions (FAQs)
---------------------------------------------

Source: https://www.justice.gov/crt/iers-frequently-asked-questions-faqs

What is the Immigrant and Employee Rights Section (IER)?

What type of employer conduct does the Immigration and Nationality Act's (INA) anti-
discrimination provision prohibit?

Can I report a violation of the anti-discrimination provision without filing a charge?

Can an IER staff member speak at my upcoming live presentation?

Who is the IER point of contact for inquiries from the media?

Which documents may I show my employer to establish my identity and permission to work?

What is the difference between an "Employment Authorization Document card (Form I-766)"
under List A of the Form I-9's Lists of Acceptable Documents and an "Employment
authorization document issued by the Department of Homeland Security (DHS)" under List C?

What receipts are listed at the bottom of Lists of Acceptable Documents?

If a worker records a USCIS or A Number on the Form I-9, does an employer need to see, or
can it ask for, a document with that number?

My new employer is requiring me to provide an expiration date for my status as a refugee in
Section 1 of the Form I-9. Do I have to provide an expiration date in Section 1?

May an employer ask an employee to present a Social Security card for payroll (and not I-9)
purposes?

Does an employer need to see a worker's Social Security card to make sure that the Social
Security number completed in Section 1 is correct?

My employer asked me to verify my employment eligibility by showing a document issued by the
Department of Homeland Security because I am not a U.S. citizen. Is my employer allowed to
do this?

A job applicant presented an Employment Authorization Document that expires next month. As
an employer, I don't want to train the worker without an assurance that the worker will
still be employment-authorized in the future. May an employer reject the applicant for
employment due to the uncertainty of continued employment authorization?

A worker has presented an employer with a document that looks fake. Can an employer refuse
to accept it without violating the anti-discrimination provision?

A worker's DHS-issued Employment Authorization Document expired and the worker wants to show
a Social Security card for reverification. Does the employer need to see a current DHS
document?

Does an employer need to reverify the work authorization of lawful permanent residents who
produce a "green card" with a future expiration date?

If I am a lawful permanent resident, do I need to show my employer a new unexpired Permanent
Resident Card, when the card expires?

I have Temporary Protected Status (TPS), and the Department of Homeland Security extended my
Employment Authorization Document. My employer insists that I show an unexpired card to
continue working. Do I need to?

When my employer created an E-Verify case with my information, I received a Tentative
Nonconfirmation (also known as a mismatch) and notified my employer that I have decided to
take action to resolve the mismatch. I have work authorization but my employer told me that
I can start working only after I resolve my mismatch. Is my employer allowed to do this?

Is an employer that participates in E-Verify allowed to terminate or suspend an employee who
decides to resolve a Tentative Nonconfirmation (also known as a mismatch), based on the
mismatch?

If a worker's name and Social Security number don't match the Social Security
Administration's records, should the employer automatically conclude that the worker is not
authorized to work?

I was rejected for a job because I am not a U.S. citizen. Is this citizenship status
discrimination?

I was rejected for a job because the employer only likes to hire workers on temporary visas.
Is the employer allowed to do this?

May I ask job applicants for citizenship or immigration status information?

If my company engages in activity regulated by the International Traffic in Arms Regulations
(ITAR) or the Export Administration Regulations (EAR), does the ITAR or the EAR require me
to hire only U.S. citizens?

I applied to a job with a small employer, and it refused to hire me due to my national
origin. Is that employment discrimination?

I applied for a job with a small employer and was informed that to be hired I would need to
speak English without a foreign accent. Is this legal?

My employee presented Form I-9 documentation in which the employee's name differs from the
name they listed on their Form I-9. Can I accept the documentation?

How should I, as an employer, handle a situation in which an employee's Form I-9
documentation differs from the name they listed on their Form I-9?

Q. What is the Immigrant and Employee Rights Section (IER)?

A. The Immigrant and Employee Rights Section (IER) of the U.S. Justice Department's Civil
Rights Division enforces the anti-discrimination provision of the Immigration and
Nationality Act (INA) . This law protects work-authorized individuals from employment
discrimination in hiring, firing, and recruitment or referral for a fee based upon
citizenship, immigration status, and national origin; unfair documentary practices when
verifying employees' employment eligibility (Form I-9 and E-Verify); and retaliation.
Individuals who believe they have been discriminated against may file charges with IER and
may be entitled to receive back pay and reinstatement, among other remedies.

Q. What type of employer conduct does the INA's anti-discrimination provision prohibit?

A. The Immigration and Nationality Act's (INA) anti-discrimination provision, found at 8
U.S.C. § 1324b , prohibits four types of unfair employment practices:

1. Employers with four or more workers cannot discriminate because of citizenship status
with respect to hiring, firing, and recruitment or referral for a fee, subject to certain
exceptions. Citizenship status includes a person’s immigration status. Recent lawful
permanent residents, U.S. citizens, U.S. nationals, and people granted asylum or refugee
status are protected from citizenship status discrimination under the INA. Lawful permanent
residents who do not apply for naturalization within six months of eligibility by virtue of
their period of residency and certain other non-U.S. citizen categories are not protected
from citizenship status discrimination under the INA. An employer may restrict hiring to
U.S. citizens only when a law, regulation, executive order, or government contract requires
the employer to do so.

2. Employers with four to 14 workers cannot discriminate because of national origin with
respect to hiring, firing, and recruitment or referral for a fee. This type of
discrimination includes treating individuals differently because of their place of birth,
country of origin, ancestry, first language, accent or because they are perceived as looking
or sounding "foreign." All work-authorized individuals are protected from national origin
discrimination by small employers under the law that IER enforces. The Equal Employment
Opportunity Commission has jurisdiction over national origin discrimination claims against
employers with 15 or more workers.

3. Employers of any size cannot engage in unfair documentary practices related to verifying
employees' employment eligibility during the I-9 and E-Verify processes. Specifically,
employers are not allowed to, on the basis of citizenship, immigration status, or national
origin, request more or different documents than are required to verify employment
eligibility and identity, reject reasonably genuine-looking documents, or specify certain
documents over others.

4. Employers of any size cannot engage in intimidation or retaliation. Employers are not
allowed to intimidate, threaten, coerce, or retaliate against individuals for filing charges
with IER, cooperating with an IER investigation, contesting an action that may constitute
unfair documentary practices or discrimination based upon citizenship status or national
origin, or otherwise asserting rights under the INA's anti-discrimination provision.

A. Individuals who believe they have suffered discrimination under this law may file a
charge of discrimination with IER by completing and submitting a charge form electronically
online , or emailing, mailing or faxing the IER charge form to:

Immigrant and Employee Rights Section Civil Rights Division U.S. Department of Justice 950
Pennsylvania Avenue, NW (4CON) Washington, DC 20530 Fax: 202-616-5509 Website:
www.justice.gov/IER Email: IER@usdoj.gov

IER’s charge form is available in several languages. Charges must be filed within 180 days
of the alleged discrimination or retaliation. More information on filing a charge is
available here .

A. After IER receives what it deems to be a charge, IER will begin its investigation. If IER
has not filed a complaint with an Administrative Law Judge (ALJ) within 120 days of
receiving a charge, it will send a letter notifying the injured party or authorized
representative of their right to file an administrative complaint against the respondent,
and indicating whether IER is continuing its investigation. IER will also notify the
respondent of its decision to continue an investigation. IER may also file a complaint with
an Administrative Law Judge after this 120-day investigatory period.

Once a case is filed, pre-trial matters are generally handled in accordance with the
applicable rules of practice and procedures , and involve discovery, depositions, and
pleadings. Administrative Law Judge decisions are directly appealable to the federal circuit
courts of appeals. Settlements or successful adjudications may result in civil penalty
assessments, back pay awards, hiring orders and the imposition of injunctive relief to end
discriminatory practices.

Q. Can I report a violation of the anti-discrimination provision without filing a charge?

A. Yes. IER has authority to initiate independent investigations based on information
developed during individual charge investigations, or information provided by other
government agencies and the general public. Independent investigations often involve
discriminatory policies, practices, or processes that potentially affect many employees or
applicants. To report a potential violation of the anti-discrimination provision without
filing a charge, you may call IER's worker hotline or email us .

1-800-255-7688 (worker hotline), or 1-800-237-2515 (TTY) 1-800-255-8155 (employer hotline)
or 1-800-237-2515 (TTY) 1-202-616-5594 (direct office line)

Civil Rights Division U.S. Department of Justice Immigrant and Employee Rights Section 950
Pennsylvania Avenue, NW (4CON) Washington, DC 20530

A. IER has multilingual staff, including attorneys, ready to assist workers, employers and
the public who contact IER through its worker or employer hotline. IER's hotlines provide
workers and employers with an opportunity to receive information about the anti-
discrimination provision of the INA and to work directly with IER's staff to resolve
potential immigration-related employment disputes informally and quickly without contested
litigation. Workers and employers are encouraged to call the respective hotlines above to
seek assistance with immigration-related employment issues. Please note that IER cannot
provide legal advice or individual legal representation. Language services are available and
free of charge.

Q. Can an IER staff member speak at my upcoming live presentation?

A. Maybe. IER staff may be available to participate in seminars, conferences, and workshops
to educate employers, workers or other members of the public about protections and
obligations under the anti-discrimination provision. Please submit all requests by email to
IER@usdoj.gov or call (202) 616-5594 and ask to speak with IER's Outreach Coordinator.

Q. Who is the IER point of contact for inquiries from the media?

A. Members of the media should contact the Justice Department's Office of Public Affairs.
The Office is responsible for ensuring that the public is informed about the Department's
activities and about the priorities and policies of the Attorney General and the President
with regard to law enforcement and legal affairs. The telephone number for the Office of
Public Affairs is (202) 514-2007.

Q. Which documents may I show my employer to establish my identity and permission to work?

A. The Department of Homeland Security has designated several combinations of acceptable
documents from which workers can choose to prove their identity and permission to work. The
Form I-9 contains Lists of Acceptable Documents that fall into three categories (see next
question for additional information about acceptable documents). A worker is allowed to
produce either List A documentation (establishing both identity and permission to work), or
a combination of documentation from List B (establishing identity) and List C (establishing
permission to work). Employers can't specify which documents they will accept from a worker
and should not prevent an individual from working because of a document's future expiration
date. For further information about acceptable documents, visit I-9 Central . For concerns
about possible discriminatory practices relating to employment eligibility verification,
contact IER.

Q. What is the difference between an "Employment Authorization Document card (Form I-766)"
under List A of the Form I-9's Lists of Acceptable Documents and an "Employment
authorization document issued by the Department of Homeland Security (DHS)" under List C?

A. An Employment Authorization Document (EAD, Form I-766) is a List A Form I-9 document and
sometimes known as a “work permit” or “Employment Authorization Card.” By contrast, an
“Employment authorization document” issued by DHS under List C refers to other types of DHS-
issued documents that do not otherwise fall within the Lists of Acceptable Documents. Some
examples of these documents include a Form I-94 issued to someone granted asylum or work-
authorized nonimmigrants (for example, U visa holders and some T visa holders , and H-1B
visa holders) because of their immigration status, an unexpired Reentry Permit (Form I-327),
Certificate of U.S. Citizenship (Form N-560) or Replacement Certificate of Citizenship (Form
N-561) (PDF, 40 KB) , a Certificate of Naturalization (Form N-550) or N-570 (PDF) , and a
Form I-797 issued to a conditional resident extending the validity of their Permanent
Resident Card, in combination with their Permanent Resident Card. You can learn more by
visiting I-9 Central’s page on Acceptable Documents , calling IER, and contacting USCIS user
support ."

Q. What receipts are listed at the bottom of the Lists of Acceptable Documents?

A. A worker may present a receipt in lieu of a listed document to complete Section 2 of the
Form I-9 as long as the receipt is an acceptable receipt for I-9 purposes. The receipt is
valid for a temporary period. There are several types of acceptable receipts :

A receipt for the application for a replacement of a lost, stolen, or damaged document. The
receipt is valid for 90 days from the first day of work or, in the case of reverification,
from the date the worker's employment authorization expired. By the end of the 90-day
receipt period, the worker should present the replacement document to complete the Form I-9.
If the worker doesn't have the replacement document, the worker can show other acceptable
Form I-9 documentation from the Lists of Acceptable Documents.

A Form I-94 containing a temporary I-551 stamp and a photograph of the individual, which is
considered a receipt for Form I-551. The worker must present the Form I-551 by the
expiration date of the temporary I-551 stamp, or within one year from the date of issuance
of the Form I-94 if the I-551 stamp does not contain an expiration date.

A Form I-94 containing an unexpired refugee admission stamp. Someone granted refugee status
may have an electronic or paper Form I-94. If a refugee presents the departure portion of a
Form I-94A containing an unexpired refugee admission stamp or a computer-generated printout
of Form I-94 with an admission class of "RE", the employer must accept it. This is
considered a receipt for a List A document. The worker must present either an Employment
Authorization Document (EAD) or a combination of a List B identity document and an
unrestricted Social Security card within 90 days after the first day of work, or in the case
of reverification, the date employment authorization expires.

An unexpired Form I-94 containing a class of admission of UHP or OAR. Employees may present
this List A receipt to show evidence of identity and employment authorization. This receipt
is valid for 90 days from date of hire or, for reverification, the date employment
authorization expires. When the receipt expires, the worker must show the employer either an
unexpired Form I-766, Employment Authorization Document (EAD), or a combination of a List B
document and a List C unrestricted Social Security card.

An unexpired Form I-94 containing a class of admission of DT issued between Feb. 24, 2022,
and Sept. 30, 2023, and indicates Ukraine as the country of citizenship. Employees may
present this Lisa A receipt to show evidence of identity and employment authorization. This
receipt is valid for 90 days from date of hire or, for reverification, the date employment
authorization expires. When the receipt expires, the worker must show the employer either an
unexpired Form I-766, Employment Authorization Document (EAD), or a combination of a List B
document and a List C unrestricted Social Security card.

An unexpired Form I-94 containing a class of admission of PAR and indicates Afghanistan as
the country of citizenship on the document may present it as an acceptable List A receipt
that temporarily shows identity and work authorization for Form I-9. This receipt is valid
for 90 days from date of hire or, for reverification, the date employment authorization
expires. When the receipt expires, the worker must show the employer either an unexpired
Form I-766, Employment Authorization Document (EAD), or a combination of a List B document
and a List C unrestricted Social Security card.

If your employer does not accept a valid receipt for I-9 purposes, contact IER for
assistance.

Q. If a worker records a USCIS or A Number on the Form I-9, does an employer need to see, or
can it ask for, a document with that number?

A. No. If a worker records a USCIS or A Number, or an Admission Number, in Section 1 of the
Form I-9, an employer is not allowed to ask or see a specific document with that number or
specify which documentation a worker may present for Section 2, based on the worker's
citizenship status. Asking an employee for proof of citizenship or immigration status in the
process of verifying a worker's employment authorization could violate the law that IER
enforces. During both initial verification and reverification, a worker may choose which
documentation to present from the List of Acceptable Documents.

Q. My new employer is requiring me to provide an expiration date for my status as a refugee
in Section 1 of the Form I-9. Do I have to provide an expiration date in Section 1?

A. No. The Form I-9 instructions direct noncitizens authorized to work whose employment
authorization does not expire, such as workers granted asylum or refugee status, and certain
citizens of the Federated States of Micronesia, the Republic of the Marshall Islands and
Palau, to enter "N/A" on the line calling for an expiration date for the worker’s employment
authorization. In addition, if someone granted asylum or refugee status chooses to show a
driver's license and unrestricted Social Security card for Section 2, these documents are
not subject to reverification under Form I-9 rules . Contact IER if you have asylum or
refugee status and your employer is requiring that you provide an expiration date in Section
1.

Q. May an employer ask an employee to present a Social Security card for payroll (and not
I-9) purposes?

A. Yes. Although an employer cannot ask a worker to present a particular document for
employment eligibility verification, an employer may request a Social Security card for
payroll purposes. However, IER recommends certain practices to avoid confusion about whether
the request is for employment eligibility verification purposes: (1) separate the Form I-9
process from other processes involving document requests; and (2) communicate the basis for
each document request. For example, explain whether the document request is for payroll or
another purpose. Workers who believe an employer is requesting a specific document for
employment eligibility verification purposes may allege discrimination in violation of the
INA's anti-discrimination provision.

Q. Does an employer need to see a worker's Social Security card to make sure that the Social
Security number completed in Section 1 is correct?

A. No. Recording a Social Security number in Section 1 of the Form I-9 is optional unless
the employer uses E-Verify. If an employer uses E-Verify, E-Verify rules require the worker
to fill in the Social Security number field. An employer still should not ask to review the
card to verify it for Section 1 purposes and requesting more or different or specific
documentation than required to complete the Form I-9 based on a worker’s citizenship status
or national origin may violate the anti-discrimination provision of the INA. Note that if a
worker is still waiting for a Social Security number when completing the Form I-9 and the
employer uses E-Verify, E-Verify instructions direct the employer to wait to create the
E-Verify case until the worker is issued a Social Security number. As long as the worker has
otherwise completed the Form I-9, the worker continues working while awaiting the Social
Security number. For further guidance, contact IER.

Q. My employer asked me to verify my employment eligibility by showing a document issued by
the Department of Homeland Security because I am not a U.S. citizen. Is my employer allowed
to do this?

A. No. For employment eligibility verification, an employer must allow its workers to choose
which documents to show from the Form I-9 Lists of Acceptable Documents, and requesting a
specific document or more documents based on a worker’s citizenship status may violate the
law the IER enforces. If the documentation reasonably appears to be genuine and to relate to
the worker, the law that IER enforces and Form I-9 instructions direct the employer to
accept it. If your employer has demanded a specific document from you for I-9 purposes,
contact IER.

Q. A job applicant presented an Employment Authorization Document that expires next month.
As an employer, I don't want to train the worker without an assurance that the worker will
still be employment-authorized in the future. May an employer reject the applicant for
employment due to the uncertainty of continued employment authorization?

A. No. Workers with temporary or continuous employment authorization may present documents
with future expiration dates. Even if a worker has temporary work authorization, the worker
may receive subsequent employment authorization. Therefore, a future expiration date does
not necessarily mean that a worker will not be able to work beyond the date on the document
presented. The rules for reverifying employment authorization when a worker has shown a
temporary employment authorization document are discussed in the Handbook for Employers .
The Handbook for Employers also explains that an employer cannot refuse to accept a document
because it has a future expiration date. In addition, consideration of a future employment
authorization expiration date in determining whether an individual is qualified for a
particular job may constitute an unfair immigration-related employment practice in violation
of the anti-discrimination provision of the Immigration and Nationality Act.

Q. A worker has presented an employer with a document that looks fake. Can an employer
refuse to accept it without violating the anti-discrimination provision?

A. Yes. Under the Immigration and Nationality Act’s employer sanctions provision , an
employer cannot accept a document that does not reasonably appear to be genuine or to relate
to the person. However, an employer is not allowed to apply different levels of scrutiny to
documents based on a worker's citizenship, immigration status, or national origin, and
rejecting a valid document based on a worker’s citizenship status or national origin may
violate the law that IER enforces. An employer may ask the worker for different
documentation if the request is based on the fact that the first document presented does not
reasonably appear to be genuine. If the employer rejects a document and does not provide the
worker an opportunity to produce a different valid document, the worker may allege unfair
documentary practices under the law that IER enforces. In addition, contacting IER for
assistance before rejecting a document solely because the employer is unfamiliar with the
type of document being presented can help an employer avoid a potential claim of unfair
documentary practices. For further assistance, contact IER.

Q. A worker's DHS-issued employment authorization document expired and the worker wants to
show a Social Security card for reverification. Does the employer need to see a current DHS
document?

A. No. For reverification, the Form I-9 rules require a worker to present an unexpired List
A or List C document of the worker's choice. Therefore, if a worker presents an unrestricted
Social Security card upon reverification, the worker does not need to present a current DHS
document even if he or she presented a DHS document for initial employment eligibility
verification. However, if a worker presents a restricted Social Security card (stating "not
valid for employment," "valid for work only with INS authorization," or "valid for work only
with DHS authorization"), the employer is not allowed to accept the restricted Social
Security card since it is not an acceptable I-9 document . In that case, the employer may
ask the worker to present another unexpired List A or List C document of the worker's
choice. Note that List B documents are not required for reverification. For questions about
the acceptability of documents for reverification, contact IER.

Q. Does an employer need to reverify the work authorization of lawful permanent residents
who produce a "green card" with a future expiration date?

A. No. Lawful permanent residents who produce an unexpired Permanent Resident Card (Form
I-551 or "green card") are not subject to reverification , even if the Form I-551 lists a
future expiration date. Reverifying Permanent Resident Cards may constitute a violation of
the anti-discrimination provision of the INA. For questions about how to conduct
reverification in a nondiscriminatory manner, contact IER.

Q. If I am a lawful permanent resident, do I need to show my employer a new unexpired
Permanent Resident Card when the card expires?

A. No. Form I-9 rules instruct employers not to reverify a lawful permanent resident who
initially presented an unexpired Permanent Resident Card, even when the card expires.
Employers that request documents when not required, based on a worker’s citizenship status,
may violate the INA’s anti-discrimination provision. If your employer reverifies your
employment eligibility after you presented an unexpired Permanent Resident Card, contact
IER.

Q. I have Temporary Protected Status ("TPS"), and the Department of Homeland Security
extended my Employment Authorization Document ("EAD"). My employer insists that I show an
unexpired card to continue working. Do I need to?

A. No. Your TPS EAD may be extended past its original expiration date in a few ways.
Sometimes, the government extends TPS EADs through the Federal Register, and the Federal
Register notice will tell you whether your EAD automatically has a new expiration date. Go
to www.uscis.gov/tps for information on TPS for your country and the most recent Federal
Register notice. If the Federal Register notice automatically extends your EAD, your EAD is
valid beyond its expiration date and you do not have to show that you have applied for a new
EAD to keep working.

If the government does not automatically extend your EAD through the Federal Register notice
but you have applied to renew your TPS EAD, you may be able to keep working after the
expiration date on your EAD. For a period of time after your EAD expiration date, you can
continue working by showing your employer your TPS EAD with the I-797C receipt notice
(showing that the government received your EAD renewal application).

Your TPS might be extended in other ways and you can get more information on EAD automatic
extensions in the Handbook for Employers M-274 on completing the Form I-9. You can also call
IER for more information.

Q. When my employer created an E-Verify case with my information, I received a Tentative
Nonconfirmation (also known as a mismatch) and notified my employer that I have decided to
take action to resolve the mismatch. I have work authorization but my employer told me that
I can start working only after I resolve my mismatch. Is my employer allowed to do this?

A. No. E-Verify rules prohibit an employer from firing a worker, suspending a worker, or
limiting a worker’s hours because the worker chooses to take action to resolve the mismatch,
as long as the status in E-Verify remains a mismatch. Employers that allow only some workers
to work while resolving a mismatch depending upon the worker's citizenship status or
national origin may be violating the anti-discrimination provision of the Immigration
Nationality Act. If your employer has not allowed you to work because you are resolving your
mismatch, contact IER.

Q. Is an employer that participates in E-Verify allowed to terminate or suspend an employee
who decides to resolve a Tentative Nonconfirmation (also known as a mismatch), based on the
mismatch?

A. No. An E-Verify mismatch does not necessarily mean the worker is not authorized to work.
The E-Verify law and rules do not permit an employer to take adverse action against the
worker because the worker is resolving the mismatch, including terminating or suspending the
worker. E-Verify rules require the employer to await a final resolution from E-Verify, even
if such final resolution takes longer than the typical period.

Terminating an individual based on the assumption that he or she is not authorized to work
based only on a mismatch may violate the anti-discrimination provision of the Immigration
Nationality Act. For more information, including employer best practices on avoiding
discrimination in the use of E-Verify, see IER's E-Verify guidance for employers here .

Q. If a worker's name and Social Security number don't match the Social Security
Administration's (SSA) records, should the employer automatically conclude that the worker
is not authorized to work?

A. No. Just because there is a mismatch between a worker's name or Social Security number
and another entity's records, including Social Security Administration records, employers
should not assume that the worker lacks employment authorization. There are many possible
reasons for a mismatch, including:

1. An unreported name change (e.g., due to marriage, divorce or other reasons) after the
Social Security number was issued;

5. An error based on hyphenated or multiple surnames; and

6. A change in citizenship status that has not been reported to the Social Security
Administration.

As the Social Security Administration states in its Employer Correction Request letter, an
employer should not use the mismatch by itself as the reason for taking any adverse
employment action against any worker. Doing so may violate the anti-discrimination provision
of the INA at 8 U.S.C. § 1324b. For more information, including steps employers can take
upon receipt of a Social Security name/number mismatch, see IER's guidance for employers on
Social Security name/number no-matches here .

Q. I was rejected for a job because I am not a U.S. citizen. Is this citizenship status
discrimination?

A. Under the anti-discrimination provision of the Immigration and Nationality Act, employers
are not allowed to limit job applicants or hires to U.S. citizens unless they are required
to do so by federal, state, or local laws or federal contracts that require specific
positions to be filled only by U.S. citizens. If a job applicant is discouraged or rejected
from employment based on their citizenship status, the employer may be committing
citizenship status discrimination in violation of the anti-discrimination provision of the
Immigration and Nationality Act. If you believe that your application may have been
improperly rejected because you are not a U.S. citizen, contact IER.

Q. I was rejected for a job because the employer only likes to hire workers on temporary
visas. Is the employer allowed to do this?

A. No. Failing to consider or hire qualified workers protected from citizenship status
discrimination (U.S. citizens, U.S. nationals, recent lawful permanent residents, and people
granted asylum or refugee status) based on their citizenship status violates Immigration and
Nationality Act's anti-discrimination provision. Employers might violate this law even if
the employer follows the rules for the temporary employment-based visa programs, if the
employer makes its hiring decision based on a worker’s citizenship status. Contact IER if
you believe an employer discriminated against you based on your citizenship status.

Q. May I ask applicants for citizenship or immigration status information?

A. Generally, an employer may ask job applicants if they have the legal right to work in the
United States and if they will need sponsorship for an employment visa. Asking for specific
citizenship status information for purposes unrelated to any recruitment, hiring, or firing
decision is unlikely to violate the law IER enforces. However, unsuccessful applicants who
are subjected to these types of questions may believe that the employer based its decision
on the applicant’s citizenship status (which includes immigration status). Therefore, it is
a best practice to avoid asking applicants for this information.

Q. If my company engages in activity regulated by the International Traffic in Arms
Regulations (ITAR) or the Export Administration Regulations (EAR), does the ITAR or the EAR
require me to hire only U.S. citizens?

A. No. Nothing under the ITAR or the EAR requires or allows an employer to limit jobs to
U.S. citizens. However, the ITAR or the EAR may require a company to obtain authorization if
certain employees require access to technology that is regulated under the ITAR or the EAR,
and such requirements may affect these employees’ scope of employment. In particular, a
company may need to obtain authorization to release covered technology to employees who are
not U.S. citizens, U.S. nationals, lawful permanent residents, or people granted asylum or
refugee status. Contact the Department of State’s Directorate of Defense Trade Controls for
more information on requirements under the ITAR and the Department of Commerce’s Bureau of
Industry and Security for more information on deemed export requirements under the EAR. See
IER's fact sheet for more information.

Q. I applied for a job with an employer that only has four employees, and it refused to hire
me due to my national origin. Is that employment discrimination?

A. Yes. The anti-discrimination provision of the Immigration Nationality Act prohibits
employers with four to 14 employees from discriminating in hiring based on national origin,
and Title VII of the Civil Rights Act (enforced by the Equal Employment Opportunity
Commission (EEOC)) prohibits employers with 15 or more employees from discriminating in
hiring based on national origin. If an employer has rejected your employment application
based on your national origin, contact IER to determine whether IER or the EEOC has
jurisdiction to assist you.

Q. I applied for a job with an employer that only has four employees and was informed that
to be hired I would need to speak English without a foreign accent. Is this legal?

A. A small employer (four to 14 employees) that rejects an applicant because of a foreign
accent may violate the anti-discrimination provision of the Immigration Nationality Act.
Such conduct by a larger employer (15 or more employees) may violate Title VII of the 1964
Civil Rights Act, which is enforced by the Equal Employment Opportunity Commission . More
information about national origin discrimination is available here .

Q. My employee presented Form I-9 documentation in which the employee's name differs from
the name they listed on their Form I-9. Can I accept the documentation?

A. Yes, as long as the documentation reasonably appears to be genuine and to relate to your
employee. An employee might have different names on the documentation they use to prove
their identity or work authorization for the Form I-9. For example, people might change
their first, last, or full name for various reasons. Employers must treat employees who have
name changes in a nondiscriminatory way, regardless of the reason for the name changes.

Q. How should I, as an employer, handle a situation in which an employee's Form I-9
documentation differs from the name they listed on their Form I-9?

A. Employers should ask employees the reason for the difference in names. USCIS also
elaborates on how to handle this depending on the situation (see chart below). Ultimately,
an employer should accept the documentation as long as it reasonably appears to be genuine
and to relate to the employee. USCIS also explains that if your employee voluntarily
provides additional documentation to explain their name change, you may keep a copy of the
extra documentation with a memo explaining the name discrepancy. This guidance also applies
if an employer uses E-Verify. Any additional documentation your employee chooses to provide
to explain their name change doesn’t need to be from the Lists of Acceptable Documents, but
this extra documentation might support the documents presented to complete the Form I-9. For
example, an employee could choose to show an employer a court record reflecting a name
change, even though that court record is not a document someone can use to complete Section
2 of the Form I-9.

Employers must treat employees who have name changes in a nondiscriminatory way, regardless
of the reason for the name changes.

If your employee Then you should Tips Provides documentation that reasonably appears to be
genuine, relates to the employee, and is on the Lists of Acceptable Documents Accept the
documentation. Provides a document that does not reasonably appear to be genuine or relate
to the employee or is not on the Lists of Acceptable Documents Reject the document and ask
your employee to provide other document(s) that satisfy Form I-9 requirements. The standard
is reasonableness. You are not expected to be a document expert. Writes more than one last
name in Section 1 , but presents a document from the List of Acceptable Documents that has
only one of those last names Ask your employee the reason for the difference in the names.
If the document reasonably appears to be genuine and to relate to the individual, you may
accept the document. Attach a memo to Form I-9 explaining the discrepancy. Presents a
document from the List of Acceptable Documents in which his or her name is spelled slightly
differently than the name he or she wrote in Section 1 Ask your employee the reason for the
difference in spelling. If it reasonably appears to be genuine and to relate to the
individual, you may accept the document. Ask your employee to use his or her full legal name
in Section 1. Ask him or her to do one of the following: correct Form I-9 and initial the
change; provide a different document with the correct spelling; provide you a corrected
document. Provides a document in which the name the employee wrote in Section 1 is
completely or substantially different from the name on the document Ask the employee the
reason for the name change

If your employee maintains that the name in Section 1 is his or her legal name and you are
satisfied that the document reasonably appears to relate to the employee, you may accept the
document.

Attach a memo to the Form I-9 explaining the discrepancy.

If the employee voluntarily provides proof of a name change, you may keep a copy of it with
the memo.

Provides a document that does not reasonably appear to be genuine and/or to relate to the
individual or if he or she cannot present other documents to satisfy the requirements of
Form I-9 You may terminate employment.

For other IER information or for direct assistance, please contact IER's anonymous worker or
employer hotlines (language interpretation available) Monday-Friday, 9:00 a.m. - 5:00 p.m.
Eastern Time:

Worker Hotline: 1-800-255-7688 Employer Hotline: 1-800-255-8155 TTY: 1-800-237-2515


----------------------------------------------------------------------


WORKER - Worker Information
---------------------------

Source: https://www.justice.gov/crt/worker-information

The Immigrant and Employee Rights Section's (IER) outreach and education program is aimed at
helping employers and workers understand the anti-discrimination provision of the INA. IER’s
staff is available to participate in seminars, conferences, as well as to meet with staff of
legal services providers and immigrant advocacy groups. To invite an IER staff member to
present to an audience of worker representatives or workers, please contact IER’s Public
Affairs staff at IER@usdoj.gov or by phone at (202) 616-5594.

Deferred Action for Childhood Arrivals Flyer (also in Spanish ): A Know Your Rights flyer
geared toward workers with Deferred Action for Childhood Arrivals (DACA) and their
advocates.

IER v. EEOC Comparison Flyer : A chart that shows the differences between the jurisdictions
of the Equal Employment Opportunity Commission and the Immigrant and Employee Rights Section
(IER).

Employment Information for Ukrainians in the United States : A fact sheet on employment
rights for Ukrainians in the United States. Also available in Ukrainian and Russian .

Employment Rights and Resources for Workers Granted Asylum or Refugee Status : A fact sheet
discussing employment rights and resources for workers granted asylum or refugee status and
how to get help.

Identifying Possible E-Verify Related Employment Discrimination : A fact sheet to assist
workers and their advocates in identifying possible E-Verify-related discrimination.

IER-EEOC Immigrant Worker Flyer (also in Arabic , Bosnian , Chinese , Farsi , Filipino ,
French , Haitian Creole , Hindi , Hmong , Korean , Punjabi , Russian , Spanish , Tagalog ,
Urdu , Vietnamese ): A flyer geared toward directing immigrant workers to the right agency
for addressing claims of employment discrimination.

IER Naturalization Fact Sheet : A document outlining basic information about immigration-
related employment discrimination for naturalizing citizens and their ceremony guests. Also
available in Spanish .

Information for Workers Granted Asylum or Refugee Status About the Form I-9 : Information
for workers granted asylum or refugee status on the Form I-9 and how to get help from IER
for possible discrimination in this process. Also available in Amharic , Arabic , Armenian ,
Burmese , Dari , Farsi , French , Karen , Kayah , Nepali , Pashto , Russian , Simplified
Chinese , Somali , Spanish , Swahili , Tigrinya , Ukrainian and Urdu .

Joint DOJ-DOL-NLRB-EEOC Fact Sheet: Retaliation Based on Exercise of Workplace Rights Is
Unlawful (also in Arabic , Creole , French , Hindi , Hmong , Korean , Mandarin , Portuguese
, Punjabi , Russian , Spanish , Tagalog , Urdu , Vietnamese ) : Jointly issued guidance
outlining protections from retaliation under various workplace laws.

Lawful Permanent Residents' Employment Rights Under the Immigration and Nationality Act
(also in Arabic , Chinese , Hindi , Portuguese , Spanish , Tagalog , Vietnamese ): A fact
sheet outlining lawful permanent residents’ protections from employment discrimination under
the INA.

Name and Social Security Number (SSN) "No-Match" Information for Employees (also in Spanish
, Arabic , Eastern Punjabi , Haitian Creole , Hindi , Korean , Russian , Simplified Chinese
, Tagalog , Traditional Chinese , Urdu , Vietnamese , Western Punjabi ) : A document that
includes a Q&A explaining possible causes for receiving a Social Security Number no-match,
how to respond, and how to get help.

Office of Refugee Resettlement ("ORR") State Letter 14-02: Employment Eligibility
Requirements for Asylees, Refugees, and other Populations Served by ORR : Information on
employment eligibility requirements with an emphasis on special considerations for asylees
and refugees and other populations served by the ORR Refugee Resettlement Program.

Protecting Your Right to Work (also in Spanish ): A fact sheet for workers explaining how to
identify possible discrimination under the INA's anti-discrimination provision and how to
get help.

Understanding the INA's Anti-Discrimination Provision (also in Spanish ): An overview of
IER's jurisdiction under the anti-discrimination provision of the Immigration and
Nationality Act.

Unlawful Employment Discrimination Based on Citizenship and National Origin : A flyer with
scenarios showing discrimination prohibited by the anti-discrimination provision of the INA.

U.S. Worker Protections Against Unlawful Preferences for Temporary Visa Holders (also in
Spanish ): Information for workers in the United States who may encounter citizenship or
immigration status discrimination in hiring, firing, recruitment or referral for a fee.

Worker Protections Against Discrimination in the E-Verify Process : A brief overview of how
E-Verify works and how to seek help for possible E-Verify-related discrimination.

Workers with Temporary Protected Status; Protect Your Right to Work : A fact sheet
explaining the rights of workers with TPS and DED and how to get help for possible
discrimination. Also available in Arabic , Dari , French , Haitian Creole , Nepali , Pashto
, Russian , Somali , Spanish and Ukrainian .

If you are a worker and want to learn more about how the Immigration and Nationality Act
protects workers from immigration-related discrimination, watch this IER worker training or
call our Worker Hotline: 1-800-255-7688.

One of the ways in which IER educates the public is by responding to written requests for
technical assistance about the anti-discrimination provision.

View a list of technical assistance letters issued by IER.

If you can't find what you're looking for on the IER website, perhaps this list of referral
agencies can provide you with the information you need.

Worker Hotline: 1-800-255-7688 • Employer Hotline: 1-800-255-8155
