
USCIS Handbook for Employers M-274 - Guidance for Completing Form I-9
=====================================================================


4.4 - 4.4 Acceptable Receipts
-----------------------------

Source: https://www.uscis.gov/i-9-central/form-i-9-resources/handbook-for-
employers-m-274/40-completing-section-2-employer-review-and-verification/44-acceptable-
receipts

You must accept a receipt in place of List A, B, or C documentation if the employee presents
one, unless employment will last less than three business days. New employees who choose to
present a receipt must do so within three business days after their first day of employment,
or for reverification or existing employees, by the date that their employment authorization
expires.

Table 2 provides a list of acceptable receipts an employee can show. Enter the word
“Receipt” followed by the title of the document in Section 2 under the list that relates to
the receipt.

When your employee presents the original replacement document, cross out the word “Receipt,”
then enter the information from the new documentation into the Additional Information field
in Section 2, and initial and date the change.

Accepting a second receipt at the end of the initial receipt validity period is not
permissible.

Description of Receipt Who may present this receipt? Is this a List A, B, or C document? How
long is this receipt valid for Form I-9 purposes? What document must the employee show at
the end of the receipt validity period? The departure portion of a Form I-94,
Arrival/Departure Record, with an unexpired refugee admission stamp or admission code of
“RE.” Refugees List A 90 days from date of hire or, for reverification, 90 days from the
date employment authorization expires. An unexpired Employment Authorization Document (Form
I-766), or a combination of a valid List B document and an unrestricted Social Security
card. The arrival portion of a Form I-94, Arrival/Departure Record, containing a temporary
I-551 (otherwise known as the Alien Documentation, Identification and Telecommunication
(ADIT)) stamp and photograph. Lawful permanent residents List A Until the expiration date of
the temporary I-551 (ADIT) stamp, or if there is no expiration date, one year from date of
admission. The actual Form I-551, Permanent Resident Card, also known as a “Green Card.” A
document that shows an employee applied to replace a lost, stolen, or damaged document. All
employees Can be List A, B, or C, depending on which document the receipt relates to. 90
days from date of hire or, for reverification, 90 days from the date employment
authorization expires. The actual replacement document. You may also accept other Form I-9
documentation from the Lists of Acceptable Documents. If you accept documentation other than
the actual replacement document, record the document information on Section 2 of a new Form
I-9 and attach it to the original Form I-9.

You should also note in the Additional Information box on the new Form I-9 the reason that
documentation other than the replacement document was presented – for example, document
delays, changes in status, or other factors – and sign and date the note.

If the receipt is for a List A document but the employee cannot present the actual
replacement List A document for which the receipt was issued by the end of the 90-day
receipt period, then the employee may choose to present a different document from List A, or
one document each from List B and List C to satisfy the Form I-9 requirements.

If the receipt is for a List B document but the employee cannot present the actual document
by the end of the 90-day receipt period, then the employee may choose to present a document
from List A instead, or a different List B document to satisfy the Form I-9 requirements.

If the receipt is for a List C document, and the employee does not provide the actual
document, the employee can present a List A document or another List C document instead.

Unexpired Form I-94, Arrival/Departure Record, containing a class of admission of UHP or OAR
on the document or unexpired Form I-94 containing a class of admission of PAR and indicates
Afghanistan as country of citizenship on the document

Certain Parolees List A 90 days (or when the I-94 expires, if less) from date of hire or,
for reverification, the date employment authorization expires. An unexpired Employment
Authorization Document (EAD), or an unrestricted Social Security card and a List B identity
document from the Form I-9 Lists of Acceptable Documents. An unexpired Form I-94,
Arrival/Departure Record that contains a class of admission of DT issued between Feb. 24,
2022, and Sept. 30, 2024, and indicates Ukraine as the country of citizenship on the
document

Ukrainian citizen parolees List A 90 days (or when the I-94 expires, if less) from date of
hire or, for reverification, the date employment authorization expires. An unexpired
Employment Authorization Document (EAD), or an unrestricted Social Security card and a List
B identity document from the Form I-9 Lists of Acceptable Documents.

This page was not helpful because the content: Select a reason has too little information
has too much information is confusing is out of date other

To protect your privacy, please do not include any personal information in your feedback.
Review our Privacy Policy .


----------------------------------------------------------------------


5.1 - 5.1 Automatic Extensions Based on a Timely Filed Application to Renew Employment Authorization and/or Employment Authorization Document During Specified Timeframes
-------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------

Source: https://www.uscis.gov/i-9-central/form-i-9-resources/handbook-for-
employers-m-274/50-automatic-extensions-of-employment-authorization-andor-employment-
authorization-documents-eads-in/51-automatic-extensions-based-on-a-timely-filed-application-
to-renew-employment-authorization

Some aliens in certain employment eligibility categories who timely filed Form I-765,
Application for Employment Authorization, before Oct. 30, 2025 , to renew their employment
authorization and/or EADs with one of the eligible category codes, may have received
automatic extensions of their employment authorization and/or EADs for up to 540 days while
their renewal applications remained pending.

The majority of those who file(d) their EAD renewal applications on or after Oct. 30, 2025 ,
are not eligible to receive an automatic extension of their employment authorization and/or
EAD, unless otherwise authorized by law or Federal Register notice.

Before Oct. 30, 2025 , those who timely and properly file(d) their EAD renewal applications
before Oct. 30, 2025, may be eligible to receive an automatic EAD extension of up to 540
days. The extension begins on the day after the “Card Expires” date on the face of their EAD
and generally continues for up to 540 days counted from the day after the EAD expires, as
applicable, or until USCIS adjudicates the renewal application, whichever is earliest.
Special rules related to the validity of the EAD may apply to those in TPS status who timely
submitted an EAD renewal application on or after July 22, 2025, but before Oct. 30, 2025.
These aliens may not be able to take advantage of the full up to 540-day period because H.R.
1 limited the duration of TPS-based employment authorization to the shorter of one year or
the duration of TPS.

This automatic extension of employment authorization and/or EAD validity depended on these
eligibility requirements:

Employees must have timely and properly filed an application to renew their employment
authorization and/or EAD on Form I-765, Application for Employment Authorization, before
their EAD expires, and the Form I-765 EAD renewal application remains pending. Exception:
Employees with EADs based on Temporary Protected Status (TPS) (A12 and C19), whose EAD
renewal applications were filed during the re-registration period described in the Federal
Register notice applicable to their country’s TPS designation, may receive an automatic
extension even if their renewal application was filed after the expiration date on the EAD.
See the Employment Authorization Document (EAD) Extension accordion on the USCIS TPS webpage
.

The eligibility category on the front of the employee’s EAD (See Figure 8) must have the
same eligibility category as the employee’s Form I-797C, Notice of Action, receipt notice
issued for the corresponding EAD renewal application. Exceptions: In the case of an EAD and
I-797C, Notice of Action, receipt notice where each contains either an A12 or C19 TPS
category code, the category codes do not have to match.

For H-4 (C26), E (A17), and L-2 (A18) dependent spouses, an unexpired Form I-94 indicating
H-4, E, or L-2 nonimmigrant status, including E-1S, E-2S, E-3S, and L-2S class of admission
codes, must accompany Form I-797C.

For applications filed before Oct. 30, 2025, employees must have one of these qualifying
eligibility categories to receive an automatic extension of their employment authorization
and/or EAD validity: A03, A05, A07, A08, A10, A17*, A18*, C08, C09, C10, C16, C20, C22, C24,
C26*, C31, and A12 or C19. Some category codes on the EAD may include the letter ‘P’ such as
C09P. Employers should disregard the letter ‘P’ when comparing the category code on the EAD
with the category code on the Form I-797C, Notice of Action receipt notice.

Qualifying TPS applicants and beneficiaries may have their TPS-based EAD automatically
extended under these conditions. See the Employment Authorization Document (EAD) Extension
accordion on the USCIS TPS webpage .

*There are limitations on employees who file a Form I-765 renewal application within
categories A17, A18, and C26 for an automatic extension. See Automatic Extensions for
Category Codes A17, A18, and C26 guidance below.

If an employee is eligible for this automatic extension, acceptable proof of employment
authorization and/or EAD validity during the automatic extension period includes an EAD that
appears expired on the face of the card, presented with a Form I-797C, Notice of Action,
receipt notice that shows a timely filed EAD renewal application in the same employment
eligibility category as the EAD (except TPS-based EADs and notices, which could have A12 or
C19 category codes). See Automatic EAD Extensions for Temporary Protected Status (TPS)
Beneficiaries in Section 5.3 for information on TPS-based EAD automatic extensions that may
not require a Form I-797C, Notice of Action, receipt notice and Guidance for Employees under
Category Codes A17, A18, and C26 for information about the additional unexpired Form I-94
documentation that H-4, E, and L-2 dependent spouses need to present with a Form I-797C,
Notice of Action.

Figure 8: Finding the Category Code and Expiration Date on an EAD (Form I-766)

The eligibility category appears on the EAD under “Category”; the expiration date appears to
the right of “Card Expires”:

Finding Information on Form I-797C Receipt Notice: Sample A

The receipt number appears on Form I-797C, Notice of Action, in the Receipt Number field, as
noted in number 1.

The filing date (the date USCIS received the application) appears in the Received Date
field, as noted in number 2. Except as explained below for TPS beneficiaries, this date
should be on or before the “Card Expires” date on the EAD. Also, if the “Received Date” is
before Oct. 30, 2025, the automatic extension period is up to 540 days from the “Card
Expires” date on the face of the EAD. Certain TPS beneficiaries are eligible for this
extension, limited by H.R. 1, if they have timely and properly filed to renew their EAD
during the re-registration period as directed in the Federal Register Notice applicable to
their country’s TPS designation, and before Oct. 30, 2025. Therefore, the filing date on a
TPS beneficiary’s Form I-797C receipt notice might be after the “Card Expires” date on their
TPS-based EAD. For more information, go to the Employment Authorization Document (EAD)
Extension accordion on the USCIS TPS webpage .

The category may appear on Form I-797C receipt notice in the Class Requested field, as noted
in number 3. If you do not see this field, see Sample B below.

Finding Information on Form I-797C Receipt Notice: Sample B

The receipt number appears on Form I-797C in the Receipt Number field, as noted in number 1.

The filing date (the date USCIS received the application) appears in the Received Date
field, as noted in number 2. This date should be on or before the “Card Expires” date on the
EAD, unless the EAD renewal application and EAD are based on TPS. For TPS-based EADs, the
date may be after the “Card Expires” date on the EAD (but must be during the re-registration
period stated in the applicable TPS Federal Register Notice). See Section 5.3 . The category
may appear on Form I-797C receipt notice in the Eligible Category field, as noted in number
3.

This page was not helpful because the content: Select a reason has too little information
has too much information is confusing is out of date other

To protect your privacy, please do not include any personal information in your feedback.
Review our Privacy Policy .


----------------------------------------------------------------------


6.1 - 6.1 Reverifying Employment Authorization for Current Employees
--------------------------------------------------------------------

Source: https://www.uscis.gov/i-9-central/form-i-9-resources/handbook-for-
employers-m-274/60-completing-supplement-b-reverification-and-rehire-of-
form-i-9/61-reverifying-employment-authorization-for-current-employees

You must reverify an employee’s employment authorization no later than the date employment
authorization expires. The employee must present a document that shows current employment
authorization, such as any documentation from List A or C, including an unrestricted Social
Security card. You must reject a restricted Social Security card and ask the employee to
provide a diﬀerent document from List A or C. You can also accept certain receipts for
reverification; see the Acceptable Receipts table in Section 4.4, Acceptable Receipts , for
more information. You cannot continue employing a person who does not provide proof of
current employment authorization.

When you must reverify an employee, you will complete one block of Supplement B,
Reverification and Rehire (formerly Section 3) and attach it to the employee’s original Form
I-9. You may use additional blocks on this supplement for subsequent reverifications or
updates, attaching additional supplement sheets as needed. If the employee’s previous update
or reverification was completed on a Form I-9 version that is no longer valid, you must also
complete Supplement B, Reverification and Rehire and attach it to the employee’s original
Form I-9. Please check uscis.gov/i-9 for the current Form I-9.

To reverify your employee using Supplement B, Reverification and Rehire:

Enter the employee’s full name from the original Form I-9 at the top of the supplement.

If the employee’s name has changed, enter the new name in the appropriate New Name fields in
one block of the supplement. Enter only the part of the name that has changed. For example,
for employees who changed only their last name, enter the last name in the Last Name field
and leave the First Name and Middle initial fields blank.

Enter the document title, number and expiration date in that block of the supplement.

You must sign, date and enter your name in the appropriate fields in that block. Keep this
supplement page with the original Form I-9.

Some employees may have entered N/A in the expiration date field in Section 1 if they are
aliens whose employment authorization does not expire, such as asylees, refugees, or certain
citizens of the Federated State of Micronesia, the Republic of the Marshall Islands, or
Palau. Reverification does not apply for such individuals unless they choose to present
evidence of employment authorization in Section 2 that contains an expiration date and
requires reverification, such as Form I-766, Employment Authorization Document. Employees
with expiring immigration status, employment authorization, or employment authorization
documents should have the necessary application or petition filed well in advance to ensure
they maintain continuous employment authorization and/or valid documents. USCIS provides
employment authorization extensions under certain conditions. See Section 7.0, Evidence of
Employment Authorization for Certain Categories , for more information.

This page was not helpful because the content: Select a reason has too little information
has too much information is confusing is out of date other

To protect your privacy, please do not include any personal information in your feedback.
Review our Privacy Policy .


----------------------------------------------------------------------


7.1 - 7.1 Lawful Permanent Residents (LPR)
------------------------------------------

Source: https://www.uscis.gov/i-9-central/form-i-9-resources/handbook-for-
employers-m-274/70-evidence-of-employment-authorization-for-certain-categories/71-lawful-
permanent-residents-lpr

You must allow employees to choose which document(s) they will present from the Lists of
Acceptable Documents. In Section 2, an LPR may choose to present a List A document (such as
Form I-551, Permanent Resident Card, commonly referred to as a Green Card) or a List B and C
document combination (such as a state-issued driver’s license and unrestricted Social
Security card). You are not required to reverify the employment eligibility of a lawful
permanent resident who presented these documents and you should not reverify their
employment authorization.

No expiration date. We issued these cards from January 1977 to August 1989.

LPRs may also present an expired or expiring PRC in combination with either of these receipt
notices as a List A document:

Form I-797, Notice of Action, receipt notice for Form I-90, Application to Replace Permanent
Resident Card.

Form I-797C, Notice of Action, receipt notice for Form N-400, Application for
Naturalization, that contains an automatic extension of the Permanent Resident Card.

The receipt notice extends the Permanent Resident Card’s validity beyond the date on the
front of the card. The receipt notice will specify the length of the automatic extension.

Reverification is never required when any of the documents listed above in this section
expire.

If an LPR or conditional resident presents one of the temporary Forms I-551 listed below,
you must reverify their employment authorization using Supplement B, Reverification and
Rehire:

List A receipt : The arrival portion of Form I-94, Arrival/Departure Record, containing an
unexpired temporary I-551 (ADIT) stamp and a photograph of the employee. The employee must
present their Form I-551 to you no later than when the stamp expires, or one year after U.S.
Customs and Border Protection issues the Form I-94 if the stamp does not contain an
expiration date.

List A document : A foreign passport with either a temporary I-551 (ADIT) stamp or I-551
printed notation on a machine-readable immigrant visa (MRIV). The employee must present a
List A or List C document to you when the stamp expires, or one year after the admission
date if the stamp does not contain an expiration date. Most MRIVs contain the following
language on the visa : “UPON ENDORSEMENT SERVES AS TEMPORARY I-551 EVIDENCING PERMANENT
RESIDENCE FOR 1 YEAR.” The one-year time period begins on the date of admission. If the
employee receives an MRIV without the statement “FOR 1 YEAR,” you should treat the MRIV as
evidence of permanent residence status for one year from the date of admission.

If the stamp in the passport is endorsed “CR-1” and is near but not on the MRIV, it is still
a valid endorsement.

Enter the number in red font under the MRIV “Expires On” date as the document number.

List C document : An expired PRC with a Form I-797, Notice of Action, receipt notice for
either a Form I-751, Petition to Remove Conditions or a Form I-829, Petition by Investor to
Remove Conditions on Permanent Resident Status, that indicates USCIS has extended the card’s
validity. You must reverify the employee’s employment authorization before their extension
ends.

This page was not helpful because the content: Select a reason has too little information
has too much information is confusing is out of date other

To protect your privacy, please do not include any personal information in your feedback.
Review our Privacy Policy .


----------------------------------------------------------------------


9.0 - 9.0 Correcting Errors or Missing Information on Form I-9
--------------------------------------------------------------

Source: https://www.uscis.gov/i-9-central/form-i-9-resources/handbook-for-
employers-m-274/90-correcting-errors-or-missing-information-on-form-i-9

Employers must ensure that all parts of the Form I-9 are properly competed and may be
subject to penalties under federal law if the form is not completed correctly.

If you discover an error or missing information in Section 1 of an employee’s Form I-9, you
should ask the employee to correct the error or add the missing information. Only employees,
or their preparer and/or translator, may correct errors or omissions made in Section 1.

Draw a line through the incorrect information;

You should attach a written explanation of why information was missing or needed correcting.
If the employee’s employment has ended, a signed and dated statement identifying the error
or omission attach to the existing form and explain why corrections could not be made, for
example, the employee no longer works for you.

If the employee is remotely located, you should develop the appropriate business process to
allow them to correct or enter missing information.

Corrections by a Preparer and/or Translator Who Helped with Section 1

Upon discovering an error or missing information, the preparer and/or translator should:

Draw a line through the incorrect information;

Draw a line through the incorrect information;

Have the employee provide the correct or missing information; and

Have the employee initial and date the correction.

If the preparer and/or translator is the same person who completed a Preparer and/or
Translator Certification block in Supplement A, Preparer and/or Translator Certification for
Section 1 when the employee initially completed Form I-9, they should not complete a second
certification block. If the preparer and/or translator did not previously complete a
certification block, they should:

Complete a certification block in Supplement A; or

If a certification block was previously completed by a diﬀerent preparer and/or translator:
Enter the new preparer and/or translator information (and indicate “for corrections”) in the
next certification block on the Supplement.

Correcting Section 2 and Supplement B, Reverification and Rehire

Only the employer (or their authorized representative) may make corrections in Section 2 or
Supplement B, Reverification and Rehires. If you discover an error or missing information,
you should:

Initial and date the correction or missing information.

You should attach a written explanation of why information was missing or needed correcting.
If you failed to enter the date you completed Section 2 and/or Supplement B, Reverification
and Rehires, you should not back date the form. Instead, enter the current date and initial
by the date field.

To correct multiple errors in one section, you may redo the section on a new Form I-9 and
attach it to the old form. You can also complete a new Form I-9 if it contains substantial
errors (such as entire sections that were left blank or you completed Section 2 based on
unacceptable documents). You should attach a written explanation to the employee’s Form I-9
describing why you made changes to an existing Form I-9 or why you created a new Form I-9.

If you make any changes on the form, do NOT conceal them by, for example, erasing text or
using correction fluid. Doing so may lead to increased liability under federal immigration
law. If you made these types of changes, we recommend you attach a signed and dated written
explanation for the changes to the Form I-9.

If you use an electronic Form I-9, your audit trail should reflect all corrections and
additions made to Sections 1 and 2, and Supplements A and B.

This page was not helpful because the content: Select a reason has too little information
has too much information is confusing is out of date other

To protect your privacy, please do not include any personal information in your feedback.
Review our Privacy Policy .


----------------------------------------------------------------------


10.0 - 10.0 Retaining Form I-9
------------------------------

Source: https://www.uscis.gov/i-9-central/form-i-9-resources/handbook-for-
employers-m-274/100-retaining-form-i-9

You must keep a completed Form I-9 on file for each employee on your payroll (or otherwise
receiving remuneration) who was hired after Nov. 6, 1986 (or on or after Nov. 27, 2009, if
employed in the CNMI). Never dispose of a current employee’s Form I-9 and any copies (or
electronic images) you made of the employee’s Form I-9 documentation; you must keep these
records for as long as the employee works for you, and for a certain amount of time after
they stop working for you. This requirement applies even if the employee ends employment
shortly after the date of hire.

Never mail Form I-9 to USCIS or U.S. Immigration and Customs Enforcement.

Only when an employee stops working for you should you calculate how much longer you must
keep their Form I-9. Federal regulations state you must retain a Form I-9 for each person
you hire for three years after the date of hire, or one year after the date employment ends,
whichever is later. To calculate how long to keep a former employee’s Form I-9:

If they worked for less than two years, retain their form for three years after the date you
entered in the First Day of Employment field.

If they worked for more than two years, retain their form for one year after the date they
stop working for you.

You can retain Form I-9 on paper, microfilm or microfiche, or electronically. You only need
to retain pages that you and your employee wrote information on: You do not need to keep the
Lists of Acceptable Documents on page 2, the instructions or blank supplement pages.

Insufficient or incomplete documentation is a violation of section 274A (a)(1)(B) of the INA
(8 CFR Part 274a .2(f)(2)).

You may retain completed paper forms with original handwritten signatures on-site or at an
off-site storage facility for the required retention period, as long as you are able to
present Forms I-9 within three business days of an inspection request from DHS, the
Department of Justice’s Civil Rights Division, Immigrant and Employee Rights Section (IER),
or U.S. Department of Labor (DOL) officers.

Retaining Form I-9 on Microfilm and Microfiche

You may retain copies of completed paper forms with original handwritten signatures on
microfilm or microfiche. When using microfilm or microfiche, you should:

Select film stock that will preserve the image and allow its access and use for the entire
retention period, which could be more than 20 years, depending on the employee and your
business;

Use well-maintained equipment to create and view clear, readable Forms I-9 and reproduce
legible paper copies for officials who inspect your forms;

Place indexes either in the first frames of the first roll of film or in the last frames of
the last roll of film of a series. For microfiche, place them in the last frames of the last
jacket of a series.

This page was not helpful because the content: Select a reason has too little information
has too much information is confusing is out of date other

To protect your privacy, please do not include any personal information in your feedback.
Review our Privacy Policy .


----------------------------------------------------------------------


11.2 - 11.2 Types of Employment Discrimination Prohibited Under the INA
-----------------------------------------------------------------------

Source: https://www.uscis.gov/i-9-central/form-i-9-resources/handbook-for-
employers-m-274/110-unlawful-discrimination-and-penalties-for-prohibited-
practices/112-types-of-employment-discrimination-prohibited-under-the-ina

The INA prohibits you from committing unfair documentary practices, which means
discriminating when you verify someone’s identity and employment authorization (generally,
the Form I-9 and E-Verify processes). Unfair documentary practices generally occur when
employers treat individuals diﬀerently on the basis of national origin, citizenship or
immigration status in the Form I-9 or E-Verify process, or any other process an employer may
use to verify employment eligibility. This can be broadly categorized into three types of
unlawful conduct:

Requesting that someone produce more or diﬀerent documents than are required by Form I-9 to
establish their identity and employment authorization;

Requesting that someone present a particular document, such as a Form I-551, Permanent
Resident Card, to establish identity and/or employment authorization; and

Rejecting documents that reasonably appear to be genuine and to relate to the person
presenting them.

These practices may constitute unfair documentary practices if they are committed based on
citizenship, immigration status, or national origin.

Citizenship or immigration status discrimination occurs when an employer treats someone
diﬀerently when hiring, firing, or recruiting because of the person’ real or perceived
citizenship or immigration status. The INA prohibits this type of discrimination if the
employer has four or more employees. Asylees, refugees, recent lawful permanent residents,
U.S. citizens and U.S. nationals are protected from this type of discrimination.

Note: There are limited situations where an employer can take an individual’s citizenship or
immigration status into account, such as when a law, executive order, regulation, or
government contract requires employers to limit a position to a particular citizenship
status. This is rare and doesn’t apply to the vast majority of jobs.

National origin discrimination generally occurs when an employer treats someone diﬀerently
when hiring, firing, or recruiting because of the person’s national origin. A person’s
national origin can relate to many things, such as place of birth, country of origin,
ethnicity, ancestry, native language, accent, or the perception that they look or sound
“foreign.” The INA’s national origin discrimination prohibition, enforced by IER, generally
covers employers with 4 to 14 employees and protects all employment-authorized individuals.
The EEOC generally has jurisdiction over national origin claims involving employers with 15
or more employees, regardless of the work authorization status of the discrimination
victims. The EEOC also covers discrimination in other aspects of employment, including terms
or conditions.

An employer or other covered entity cannot intimidate, threaten, coerce, or otherwise
retaliate against a person because that person has engaged in protected activity, such as
when someone:

Participates in an IER investigation or lawsuit;

Opposes action that may be discrimination under the INA; or

Asserts another person’s rights under the INA’s anti-discrimination provisions.

You can find more information on how to avoid discrimination at www.justice.gov/IER .

This page was not helpful because the content: Select a reason has too little information
has too much information is confusing is out of date other

To protect your privacy, please do not include any personal information in your feedback.
Review our Privacy Policy .


----------------------------------------------------------------------


13.2 - 13.2 List B Documents That Establish Identity
----------------------------------------------------

Source: https://www.uscis.gov/i-9-central/form-i-9-resources/handbook-for-
employers-m-274/130-acceptable-documents-for-verifying-employment-authorization-and-
identity/132-list-b-documents-that-establish-identity

The illustrations do not reflect the actual size of the documents.

1. Driver's license or ID card issued by a State or outlying possession of the United States
provided it contains a photograph or information such as name, date of birth, sex, height,
eye color, and address

A driver’s license can be issued by any state or territory of the United States (including
the District of Columbia, Puerto Rico, the U.S. Virgin Islands, Guam, American Samoa, and
the Commonwealth of the Northern Mariana Islands) or by a Canadian government authority. You
may accept a driver's license if it contains a photograph or, if it does not contain a
photograph, it includes identifying information such as name, date of birth, sex, height,
eye color, and address.

A driver’s license or ID card issued by a state department of motor vehicles should be
accepted for Form I-9 as a List B, Item 1 document only and not be accepted as a List B Item
2, ID card issued by U.S. federal, state, or local government agency.

Some states may place restrictive notations on their licenses. For Form I-9 purposes, you
may accept these licenses.

2. ID card issued by federal, state or local government agencies or entities, provided it
contains a photograph or information such as name, date of birth, sex, height, eye color,
and address

ID cards other than those included in List B, Item 1, can be issued by any state (including
the District of Columbia, Puerto Rico, the U.S. Virgin Islands, Guam, American Samoa, and
the Commonwealth of the Northern Mariana Islands) or local government. You may accept an ID
card if it contains a photograph or, if it does not contain a photograph, it includes
identifying information, such as name, date of birth, sex, height, eye color, and address.
Federal government employee personal identity verification (PIV) or common access cards
(CAC), state or local government employee ID cards, and state-issued prison inmate ID cards
are examples of ID cards issued by federal, state, or local government agencies.

This option does not include driver’s licenses or ID cards issued by a state department of
motor vehicles, which are List B, Item 1 documents for Form I-9 purposes.

Some states may place restrictive notations on their ID cards. For Form I-9 purposes, you
may accept these cards.

ID card issued to active-duty U.S. military personnel, selected reserve, Department of
Defense civilian employees and eligible contractor personnel.

ID Card for U.S. military family members and U.S. military retirees.

9. Driver's license issued by a Canadian government authority

For persons under age 18 who are unable to present a document listed above:

Receipt for a replacement of a lost, stolen, or damaged List B document may be presented in
lieu of a document listed above for a temporary period.

For receipt validity dates, see the M-274, Section 4.4 Acceptable Receipts .

This page was not helpful because the content: Select a reason has too little information
has too much information is confusing is out of date other

To protect your privacy, please do not include any personal information in your feedback.
Review our Privacy Policy .
