
49 CFR Part 395 - Hours of Service of Drivers
=============================================


§ 395.1 Scope of rules in this part.
------------------------------------

(a) General. (1) The rules in this part apply to all motor carriers and drivers, except as
provided in paragraphs (b) through (x) of this section.

(2) The exceptions from Federal requirements contained in paragraphs (l) and (m) of this
section do not preempt State laws and regulations governing the safe operation of commercial
motor vehicles.

(b) Driving conditions—(1) Adverse driving conditions. Except as provided in paragraph
(h)(3) of this section, a driver who encounters adverse driving conditions, as defined in §
395.2, and cannot, because of those conditions, safely complete the run within the maximum
driving time or duty time during which driving is permitted under § 395.3(a) or § 395.5(a)
may drive and be permitted or required to drive a commercial motor vehicle for not more than
two additional hours beyond the maximum allowable hours permitted under § 395.3(a) or §
395.5(a) to complete that run or to reach a place offering safety for the occupants of the
commercial motor vehicle and security for the commercial motor vehicle and its cargo.

(2) Emergency conditions. In case of any emergency, a driver may complete his/her run
without being in violation of the provisions of the regulations in this part, if such run
reasonably could have been completed absent the emergency.

(c) Driver-salesperson. The provisions of § 395.3(b) shall not apply to any driver-
salesperson whose total driving time does not exceed 40 hours in any period of 7 consecutive
days.

(d) Oilfield operations. (1) In the instance of drivers of commercial motor vehicles used
exclusively in the transportation of oilfield equipment, including the stringing and picking
up of pipe used in pipelines, and servicing of the field operations of the natural gas and
oil industry, any period of 8 consecutive days may end with the beginning of any off-duty
period of 24 or more successive hours.

(2) In the case of specially trained drivers of commercial motor vehicles that are specially
constructed to service oil wells, on-duty time shall not include waiting time at a natural
gas or oil well site. Such waiting time shall be recorded as “off duty” for purposes of §
395.8, with remarks or annotations to indicate the specific off-duty periods that are
waiting time, or on a separate “waiting time” line on the record of duty status to show that
off-duty time is also waiting time. Waiting time shall not be included in calculating the
14-hour period in § 395.3(a)(2). Specially trained drivers of such commercial motor vehicles
are not eligible to use the provisions of paragraph (e)(1) of this section.

(e) Short-haul operations—(1) 150 air-mile radius driver. A driver is exempt from the
requirements of §§ 395.8 and 395.11 if:

(i) The driver operates within a 150 air-mile radius (172.6 statute miles) of the normal
work reporting location;

(ii) The driver, except a driver-salesperson, returns to the work reporting location and is
released from work within 14 consecutive hours;

(iii)(A) A property-carrying commercial motor vehicle driver has at least 10 consecutive
hours off-duty separating each 14 hours on-duty;

(B) A passenger-carrying commercial motor vehicle driver has at least 8 consecutive hours
off-duty separating each 14 hours on-duty; and

(iv) The motor carrier that employs the driver maintains and retains for a period of 6
months accurate and true time records showing:

(A) The time the driver reports for duty each day;

(B) The total number of hours the driver is on-duty each day;

(C) The time the driver is released from duty each day; and

(D) The total time for the preceding 7 days in accordance with § 395.8(j)(2) for drivers
used for the first time or intermittently.

(2) Operators of property-carrying commercial motor vehicles not requiring a commercial
driver's license. Except as provided in this paragraph, a driver is exempt from the
requirements of §§ 395.3(a)(2), 395.8, and 395.11 and ineligible to use the provisions of §
395.1(e)(1), (g), and (o) if:

(i) The driver operates a property-carrying commercial motor vehicle for which a commercial
driver's license is not required under part 383 of this subchapter;

(ii) The driver operates within a 150 air-mile radius of the location where the driver
reports to and is released from work, i.e., the normal work reporting location;

(iii) The driver returns to the normal work reporting location at the end of each duty tour;

(iv) The driver does not drive:

(A) After the 14th hour after coming on duty on 5 days of any period of 7 consecutive days;
and

(B) After the 16th hour after coming on duty on 2 days of any period of 7 consecutive days;

(v) The motor carrier that employs the driver maintains and retains for a period of 6 months
accurate and true time records showing:

(A) The time the driver reports for duty each day;

(B) The total number of hours the driver is on duty each day;

(C) The time the driver is released from duty each day;

(D) The total time for the preceding 7 days in accordance with § 395.8(j)(2) for drivers
used for the first time or intermittently.

(f) Retail store deliveries. The provisions of § 395.3 (a) and (b) shall not apply with
respect to drivers of commercial motor vehicles engaged solely in making local deliveries
from retail stores and/or retail catalog businesses to the ultimate consumer, when driving
solely within a 100-air mile radius of the driver's work-reporting location, during the
period from December 10 to December 25, both inclusive, of each year.

(g) Sleeper berths—(1) Property-carrying commercial motor vehicle—(i) General. A driver who
operates a property-carrying commercial motor vehicle equipped with a sleeper berth, as
defined in § 395.2, and uses the sleeper berth to obtain the off-duty time required by §
395.3(a)(1) must accumulate:

(A) At least 10 consecutive hours off-duty;

(B) At least 10 consecutive hours of sleeper berth time;

(C) A combination of consecutive sleeper berth and off-duty time amounting to at least 10
hours;

(D) A combination of sleeper berth time of at least 7 consecutive hours and up to 3 hours
riding in the passenger seat of the vehicle while the vehicle is moving on the highway,
either immediately before or after the sleeper berth time, amounting to at least 10
consecutive hours; or

(E) The equivalent of at least 10 consecutive hours off-duty calculated under paragraphs
(g)(1)(ii) and (iii) of this section.

(ii) Sleeper berth. A driver may accumulate the equivalent of at least 10 consecutive hours
off-duty by taking not more than two periods of either sleeper berth time or a combination
of off-duty time and sleeper berth time if:

(A) Neither rest period is shorter than 2 consecutive hours;

(B) One rest period is at least 7 consecutive hours in the sleeper berth;

(C) The total of the two periods is at least 10 hours; and

(D) Driving time in the period immediately before and after each rest period, when added
together:

(1) Does not exceed 11 hours under § 395.3(a)(3); and

(2) Does not violate the 14-hour duty-period limit under § 395.3(a)(2).

(iii) Calculation—(A) In general. The driving time limit and the 14-hour duty-period limit
must be re-calculated from the end of the first of the two periods used to comply with
paragraph (g)(1)(i)(E) of this section.

(B) 14-hour period. The 14-hour driving window for purposes of § 395.3(a)(2) does not
include qualifying rest periods under paragraph (g)(1)(ii) of this section.

(2) Specially trained driver of a specially constructed oil well servicing commercial motor
vehicle at a natural gas or oil well location. A specially trained driver who operates a
commercial motor vehicle specially constructed to service natural gas or oil wells that is
equipped with a sleeper berth, as defined in §§ 395.2 and 393.76 of this subchapter, or who
is off duty at a natural gas or oil well location, may accumulate the equivalent of 10
consecutive hours off duty time by taking a combination of at least 10 consecutive hours of
off-duty time, sleeper-berth time, or time in other sleeping accommodations at a natural gas
or oil well location; or by taking two periods of rest in a sleeper berth, or other sleeping
accommodation at a natural gas or oil well location, providing:

(i) Neither rest period is shorter than 2 hours;

(ii) The driving time in the period immediately before and after each rest period, when
added together, does not exceed the limit specified in § 395.3(a)(3);

(iii) The driver does not drive after the 14th hour after coming on duty following 10 hours
off duty, where the 14th hour is calculated:

(A) By excluding any sleeper berth or other sleeping accommodation period of at least 2
hours which, when added to a subsequent sleeper berth or other sleeping accommodation
period, totals at least 10 hours, and

(B) By including all on-duty time, all off-duty time not spent in the sleeper berth or other
sleeping accommodations, all such periods of less than 2 hours, and any period not described
in paragraph (g)(2)(iii)(A) of this section; and

(iv) The driver may not return to driving subject to the normal limits under § 395.3 without
taking at least 10 consecutive hours off duty, at least 10 consecutive hours in the sleeper
berth or other sleeping accommodations, or a combination of at least 10 consecutive hours
off duty, sleeper berth time, or time in other sleeping accommodations.

(3) Passenger-carrying commercial motor vehicles. A driver who is driving a passenger-
carrying commercial motor vehicle that is equipped with a sleeper berth, as defined in §§
395.2 and 393.76 of this subchapter, may accumulate the equivalent of 8 consecutive hours of
off-duty time by taking a combination of at least 8 consecutive hours off-duty and sleeper
berth time; or by taking two periods of rest in the sleeper berth, providing:

(i) Neither rest period is shorter than two hours;

(ii) The driving time in the period immediately before and after each rest period, when
added together, does not exceed 10 hours;

(iii) The on-duty time in the period immediately before and after each rest period, when
added together, does not include any driving time after the 15th hour; and

(iv) The driver may not return to driving subject to the normal limits under § 395.5 without
taking at least 8 consecutive hours off duty, at least 8 consecutive hours in the sleeper
berth, or a combination of at least 8 consecutive hours off duty and sleeper berth time.

(h) State of Alaska—(1) Property-carrying commercial motor vehicle—(i) In general. The
provisions of § 395.3(a) and (b) do not apply to any driver who is driving a commercial
motor vehicle in the State of Alaska. A driver who is driving a property-carrying commercial
motor vehicle in the State of Alaska must not drive or be required or permitted to drive:

(A) More than 15 hours following 10 consecutive hours off-duty;

(B) After being on-duty for 20 hours or more following 10 consecutive hours off-duty;

(C) After having been on-duty for 70 hours in any period of 7 consecutive days, if the motor
carrier for which the driver drives does not operate every day in the week; or

(D) After having been on-duty for 80 hours in any period of 8 consecutive days, if the motor
carrier for which the driver drives operates every day in the week.

(ii) Off-duty periods. Before driving, a driver who operates a property-carrying commercial
motor vehicle equipped with a sleeper berth, as defined in § 395.2, and uses the sleeper
berth to obtain the required off-duty time in the State of Alaska, must accumulate:

(A) At least 10 consecutive hours off-duty;

(B) At least 10 consecutive hours of sleeper berth time;

(C) A combination of consecutive sleeper berth and off-duty time amounting to at least 10
hours;

(D) A combination of consecutive sleeper berth time and up to 3 hours riding in the
passenger seat of the vehicle while the vehicle is moving on a highway, either immediately
before or after a period of at least 7, but less than 10, consecutive hours in the sleeper
berth; or

(E) The equivalent of at least 10 consecutive hours off-duty calculated under paragraph
(h)(1)(iii) of this section.

(iii) Sleeper berth. A driver who uses a sleeper berth to comply with the hours of service
regulations may accumulate the equivalent of at least 10 consecutive hours off-duty by
taking not more than two periods of either sleeper berth time or a combination of off-duty
time and sleeper berth time if:

(A) Neither rest period is shorter than 2 consecutive hours;

(B) One rest period is at least 7 consecutive hours in the sleeper berth;

(C) The total of the two periods is at least 10 hours; and

(D) Driving time in the period immediately before and after each rest period, when added
together:

(1) Does not exceed 15 hours; and

(2) Does not violate the 20-hour duty period under paragraph (h)(1)(i)(B) of this section.

(iv) Calculation—(A) In general. The driving time limit and the 20-hour duty-period limit
must be re-calculated from the end of the first of the two periods used to comply with
paragraph (h)(1)(ii)(E) of this section.

(B) 20-hour period. The 20-hour duty period under paragraph (h)(1)(i)(B) does not include
off-duty or sleeper berth time.

(2) Passenger-carrying commercial motor vehicle. The provisions of § 395.5 do not apply to
any driver who is driving a passenger-carrying commercial motor vehicle in the State of
Alaska. A driver who is driving a passenger-carrying commercial motor vehicle in the State
of Alaska must not drive or be required or permitted to drive—

(i) More than 15 hours following 8 consecutive hours off-duty;

(ii) After being on-duty for 20 hours or more following 8 consecutive hours off-duty;

(iii) After having been on-duty for 70 hours in any period of 7 consecutive days, if the
motor carrier for which the driver drives does not operate every day in the week; or

(iv) After having been on-duty for 80 hours in any period of 8 consecutive days, if the
motor carrier for which the driver drives operates every day in the week.

(3) Adverse driving conditions. (i) A driver who is driving a commercial motor vehicle in
the State of Alaska and who encounters adverse driving conditions (as defined in § 395.2)
may drive and be permitted or required to drive a commercial motor vehicle for the period of
time needed to complete the run.

(ii) After a property-carrying commercial motor vehicle driver completes the run, that
driver must be off-duty for at least 10 consecutive hours before he/she drives again; and

(iii) After a passenger-carrying commercial motor vehicle driver completes the run, that
driver must be off-duty for at least 8 consecutive hours before he/she drives again.

(i) State of Hawaii. The rules in § 395.8 do not apply to a driver who drives a commercial
motor vehicle in the State of Hawaii, if the motor carrier who employs the driver maintains
and retains for a period of 6 months accurate and true records showing—

(1) The total number of hours the driver is on duty each day; and

(2) The time at which the driver reports for, and is released from, duty each day.

(j) Travel time—(1) When a property-carrying commercial motor vehicle driver at the
direction of the motor carrier is traveling, but not driving or assuming any other
responsibility to the carrier, such time must be counted as on-duty time unless the driver
is afforded at least 10 consecutive hours off duty when arriving at destination, in which
case he/she must be considered off duty for the entire period.

(2) When a passenger-carrying commercial motor vehicle driver at the direction of the motor
carrier is traveling, but not driving or assuming any other responsibility to the carrier,
such time must be counted as on-duty time unless the driver is afforded at least 8
consecutive hours off duty when arriving at destination, in which case he/she must be
considered off duty for the entire period.

(k) Agricultural operations. The provisions of this part shall not apply during planting and
harvesting periods, as determined by each State, to drivers transporting

(1) Agricultural commodities from the source of the agricultural commodities to a location
within a 150 air-mile radius from the source;

(2) Farm supplies for agricultural purposes from a wholesale or retail distribution point of
the farm supplies to a farm or other location where the farm supplies are intended to be
used within a 150 air-mile radius from the distribution point;

(3) Farm supplies for agricultural purposes from a wholesale distribution point of the farm
supplies to a retail distribution point of the farm supplies within a 150 air-mile radius
from the wholesale distribution point; or

(4) Livestock (as defined in section 602 of the Emergency Livestock Feed Assistance Act of
1988 (7 U.S.C. 1471) including insects)) within a 150 air-mile radius from the final
destination of the livestock.

(l) Ground water well drilling operations. In the instance of a driver of a commercial motor
vehicle who is used primarily in the transportation and operations of a ground water well
drilling rig, any period of 7 or 8 consecutive days may end with the beginning of any off-
duty period of 24 or more successive hours.

(m) Construction materials and equipment. In the instance of a driver of a commercial motor
vehicle who is used primarily in the transportation of construction materials and equipment,
any period of 7 or 8 consecutive days may end with the beginning of any off-duty period of
24 or more successive hours.

(n) Utility service vehicles. The provisions of this part shall not apply to a driver of a
utility service vehicle as defined in § 395.2.

(o) Property-carrying driver. A property-carrying driver is exempt from the requirements of
§ 395.3(a)(2) if:

(1) The driver has returned to the driver's normal work reporting location and the carrier
released the driver from duty at that location for the previous five duty tours the driver
has worked;

(2) The driver has returned to the normal work reporting location and the carrier releases
the driver from duty within 16 hours after coming on duty following 10 consecutive hours off
duty; and

(3) The driver has not taken this exemption within the previous 6 consecutive days, except
when the driver has begun a new 7- or 8-consecutive day period with the beginning of any
off-duty period of 34 or more consecutive hours as allowed by § 395.3(c).

(p) Commercial motor vehicle transportation to or from a motion picture production site. A
driver of a commercial motor vehicle providing transportation of property or passengers to
or from a theatrical or television motion picture production site is exempt from the
requirements of § 395.3(a) if the driver operates within a 100 air-mile radius of the
location where the driver reports to and is released from work, i.e., the normal work-
reporting location. With respect to the maximum daily hours of service, such a driver may
not drive—

(1) More than 10 hours following 8 consecutive hours off duty;

(2) For any period after having been on duty 15 hours following 8 consecutive hours off
duty.

(3) If a driver of a commercial motor vehicle providing transportation of property or
passengers to or from a theatrical or television motion picture production site operates
beyond a 100 air-mile radius of the normal work-reporting location, the driver is subject to
§ 395.3(a), and paragraphs (p)(1) and (2) of this section do not apply.

(q) Attendance on commercial motor vehicles containing Division 1.1, 1.2, or 1.3 explosives.
Operators who are required by 49 CFR 397.5 to be in attendance on commercial motor vehicles
containing Division 1.1, 1.2, or 1.3 explosives are on duty at all times while performing
attendance functions or any other work for a motor carrier. Operators of commercial motor
vehicles containing Division 1.1, 1.2, or 1.3 explosives subject to the requirements for a
30-minute rest break in § 395.3(a)(3)(ii) may use 30 minutes or more of attendance time to
meet the requirement for a rest break, providing they perform no other work during the
break. Such drivers must record the rest break as on-duty time in their record of duty
status with remarks or annotations to indicate the specific on-duty periods that are used to
meet the requirement for break.

(r) Railroad signal employees. The provisions of this part shall not apply to a signal
employee, as defined in § 395.2, who operates a commercial motor vehicle, is engaged in
installing, repairing, or maintaining signal systems, is employed by a railroad carrier or a
contractor or subcontractor to a railroad carrier, while regulated by the Federal Railroad
Administration.

(s) Covered farm vehicles. The rules in this part do not apply to drivers of “covered farm
vehicles,” as defined in 49 CFR 390.5.

(t) Ready-mixed concrete delivery vehicle. A driver of a ready-mixed concrete delivery
vehicle subject to the requirement for a 30-minute rest break in § 395.3(a)(3)(ii) may use
30-minutes or more of time spent while waiting with the commercial motor vehicle at a job
site or terminal to meet the requirement for the 30-minute rest break, providing the driver
performs no other work during the break.

(u) Transport of commercial bees. The provisions of § 395.3(a)(3)(ii), requiring a 30-minute
rest break, do not apply to a driver engaged in the interstate transportation of bees by
commercial motor vehicle as long as the bees are on the vehicle.

(v) Transport of livestock. The provisions of § 395.3(a)(3)(ii), requiring a 30-minute rest
break, do not apply to a driver engaged in the interstate transportation of livestock by
commercial motor vehicle while the livestock are on the vehicle.

(w) Hi-rail vehicles. For the driver of a hi-rail vehicle, the maximum on duty time under §
395.3 shall not include time in transportation to or from a duty assignment if such time in
transportation—

(1) Does not exceed 2 hours per calendar day or a total of 30 hours per calendar month; and

(2) Is fully and accurately accounted for in records to be maintained by the motor carrier
and such records are made available upon request of the Federal Motor Carrier Safety
Administration or the Federal Railroad Administration.

(x) Pipeline welding trucks. The rules in this part do not apply to drivers of “pipeline
welding trucks,” as defined in 49 CFR 390.38(b).


----------------------------------------------------------------------


§ 395.2 Definitions.
--------------------

As used in this part, the following words and terms are construed to mean:

Adverse driving conditions means snow, ice, sleet, fog, or other adverse weather conditions
or unusual road or traffic conditions that were not known, or could not reasonably be known,
to a driver immediately prior to beginning the duty day or immediately before beginning
driving after a qualifying rest break or sleeper berth period, or to a motor carrier
immediately prior to dispatching the driver.

Agricultural commodity means:

(1) Any agricultural commodity, non-processed food, feed, fiber, or livestock as defined in
this section.

(2) As used in this definition, the term “any agricultural commodity” means horticultural
products at risk of perishing, or degrading in quality, during transport by commercial motor
vehicle, including plants, sod, flowers, shrubs, ornamentals, seedlings, live trees, and
Christmas trees.

Driver-salesperson means any employee who is employed solely as such by a private carrier of
property by commercial motor vehicle, who is engaged both in selling goods, services, or the
use of goods, and in delivering by commercial motor vehicle the goods sold or provided or
upon which the services are performed, who does so entirely within a radius of 100 miles of
the point at which he/she reports for duty, who devotes not more than 50 percent of his/her
hours on duty to driving time. The term selling goods for purposes of this section shall
include in all cases solicitation or obtaining of reorders or new accounts, and may also
include other selling or merchandising activities designed to retain the customer or to
increase the sale of goods or services, in addition to solicitation or obtaining of reorders
or new accounts.

Driving time means all time spent at the driving controls of a commercial motor vehicle in
operation.

Eight consecutive days means the period of 8 consecutive days beginning on any day at the
time designated by the motor carrier for a 24-hour period.

Electronic logging device (ELD) means a device or technology that automatically records a
driver's driving time and facilitates the accurate recording of the driver's hours of
service, and that meets the requirements of subpart B of this part.

ELD record means a record of duty status, recorded on an ELD, that reflects the data
elements that an ELD must capture.

Farm supplies for agricultural purposes means products directly related to the growing or
harvesting of agricultural commodities during the planting and harvesting seasons within
each State, as determined by the State, and livestock feed at any time of the year.

Ground water well drilling rig means any vehicle, machine, tractor, trailer, semi-trailer,
or specialized mobile equipment propelled or drawn by mechanical power and used on highways
to transport water well field operating equipment, including water well drilling and pump
service rigs equipped to access ground water.

Hi-rail vehicle means an internal rail flaw detection vehicle equipped with flange hi-rails.

Livestock means livestock as defined in sec. 602 of the Emergency Livestock Feed Assistance
Act of 1988 [7 U.S.C. 1471], as amended, insects, and all other living animals cultivated,
grown, or raised for commercial purposes, including aquatic animals.

Multiple stops means all stops made in any one village, town, or city may be computed as
one.

Non-processed food means food commodities in a raw or natural state and not subjected to
significant post-harvest changes to enhance shelf life, such as canning, jarring, freezing,
or drying. The term “non-processed food” includes fresh fruits and vegetables, and cereal
and oilseed crops which have been minimally processed by cleaning, cooling, trimming,
cutting, chopping, shucking, bagging, or packaging to facilitate transport by commercial
motor vehicle.

On-duty time means all time from the time a driver begins to work or is required to be in
readiness to work until the time the driver is relieved from work and all responsibility for
performing work. On-duty time shall include:

(1) All time at a plant, terminal, facility, or other property of a motor carrier or
shipper, or on any public property, waiting to be dispatched, unless the driver has been
relieved from duty by the motor carrier;

(2) All time inspecting, servicing, or conditioning any commercial motor vehicle at any
time;

(3) All driving time as defined in the term driving time;

(4) All time in or on a commercial motor vehicle, other than:

(i) Time spent resting in or on a parked vehicle, except as otherwise provided in § 397.5 of
this subchapter;

(ii) Time spent resting in a sleeper berth; or

(iii) Up to 3 hours riding in the passenger seat of a property-carrying vehicle moving on
the highway immediately before or after a period of at least 7 consecutive hours in the
sleeper berth;

(5) All time loading or unloading a commercial motor vehicle, supervising, or assisting in
the loading or unloading, attending a commercial motor vehicle being loaded or unloaded,
remaining in readiness to operate the commercial motor vehicle, or in giving or receiving
receipts for shipments loaded or unloaded;

(6) All time repairing, obtaining assistance, or remaining in attendance upon a disabled
commercial motor vehicle;

(7) All time spent providing a breath sample or urine specimen, including travel time to and
from the collection site, to comply with the random, reasonable suspicion, post-crash, or
follow-up testing required by part 382 of this subchapter when directed by a motor carrier;

(8) Performing any other work in the capacity, employ, or service of, a motor carrier; and

(9) Performing any compensated work for a person who is not a motor carrier.

Ready-mixed concrete delivery vehicle means a vehicle designed to deliver ready-mixed
concrete on a daily basis and equipped with a mechanism under which the vehicle's propulsion
engine provides the power to operate a mixer drum to agitate and mix the product en route to
the delivery site.

Seven consecutive days means the period of 7 consecutive days beginning on any day at the
time designated by the motor carrier for a 24-hour period.

Signal employee, as defined in 49 U.S.C. 21101(4), means an individual who is engaged in
installing, repairing, or maintaining signal systems.

Sleeper berth means a berth conforming to the requirements of § 393.76 of this chapter.

Supporting document means a document, in any medium, generated or received by a motor
carrier in the normal course of business as described in § 395.11 that can be used, as
produced or with additional identifying information, by the motor carrier and enforcement
officials to verify the accuracy of a driver's record of duty status.

Transportation of construction material and equipment means the transportation of
construction and pavement materials, construction equipment, and construction maintenance
vehicles, by a driver to or from an active construction site (a construction site between
mobilization of equipment and materials to the site to the final completion of the
construction project) within a 75 air mile radius of the normal work reporting location of
the driver, except that a State, upon notice to the Administrator, may establish a different
air mile radius limitation for purposes of this definition if such limitation is between 50
and 75 air miles and applies only to movements that take place entirely within the State.
This paragraph does not apply to the transportation of material found by the Secretary to be
hazardous under 49 U.S.C. 5103 in a quantity requiring placarding under regulations issued
to carry out such section.

Twenty-four-hour period means any 24-consecutive-hour period beginning at the time
designated by the motor carrier for the terminal from which the driver is normally
dispatched.

Utility service vehicle means any commercial motor vehicle:

(1) Used in the furtherance of repairing, maintaining, or operating any structures or any
other physical facilities necessary for the delivery of public utility services, including
the furnishing of electric, gas, water, sanitary sewer, telephone, television cable or
community antenna service, and broadband-internet and cellular telephone operations;

(2) While engaged in any activity necessarily related to the ultimate delivery of such
public utility services to consumers, including travel or movement to, from, upon, or
between activity sites (including occasional travel or movement outside the service area
necessitated by any utility emergency as determined by the utility provider); and

(3) Except for any occasional emergency use, operated primarily within the service area of a
utility's subscribers or consumers, without regard to whether the vehicle is owned, leased,
or rented by the utility.


----------------------------------------------------------------------


§ 395.3 Maximum driving time for property-carrying vehicles.
------------------------------------------------------------

(a) Except as otherwise provided in § 395.1, no motor carrier shall permit or require any
driver used by it to drive a property-carrying commercial motor vehicle, nor shall any such
driver drive a property-carrying commercial motor vehicle, regardless of the number of motor
carriers using the driver's services, unless the driver complies with the following
requirements:

(1) Start of work shift. A driver may not drive without first taking 10 consecutive hours
off duty;

(2) 14-hour period. A driver may not drive after a period of 14 consecutive hours after
coming on-duty following 10 consecutive hours off-duty.

(3) Driving time and interruptions of driving periods—(i) Driving time. A driver may drive a
total of 11 hours during the period specified in paragraph (a)(2) of this section.

(ii) Interruption of driving time. Except for drivers who qualify for either of the short-
haul exceptions in § 395.1(e)(1) or (2), driving is not permitted if more than 8 hours of
driving time have passed without at least a consecutive 30-minute interruption in driving
status. A consecutive 30-minute interruption of driving status may be satisfied either by
off-duty, sleeper berth or on-duty not driving time or by a combination of off-duty, sleeper
berth and on-duty not driving time.

(b) No motor carrier shall permit or require a driver of a property-carrying commercial
motor vehicle to drive, nor shall any driver drive a property-carrying commercial motor
vehicle, regardless of the number of motor carriers using the driver's services, for any
period after—

(1) Having been on duty 60 hours in any period of 7 consecutive days if the employing motor
carrier does not operate commercial motor vehicles every day of the week; or

(2) Having been on duty 70 hours in any period of 8 consecutive days if the employing motor
carrier operates commercial motor vehicles every day of the week.

(c)(1) Any period of 7 consecutive days may end with the beginning of an off-duty period of
34 or more consecutive hours.

(2) Any period of 8 consecutive days may end with the beginning of an off-duty period of 34
or more consecutive hours.


----------------------------------------------------------------------


§ 395.5 Maximum driving time for passenger-carrying vehicles.
-------------------------------------------------------------

Subject to the exceptions and exemptions in § 395.1:

(a) No motor carrier shall permit or require any driver used by it to drive a passenger-
carrying commercial motor vehicle, nor shall any such driver drive a passenger-carrying
commercial motor vehicle:

(1) More than 10 hours following 8 consecutive hours off duty; or

(2) For any period after having been on duty 15 hours following 8 consecutive hours off
duty.

(b) No motor carrier shall permit or require a driver of a passenger-carrying commercial
motor vehicle to drive, nor shall any driver drive a passenger-carrying commercial motor
vehicle, regardless of the number of motor carriers using the driver's services, for any
period after—

(1) Having been on duty 60 hours in any 7 consecutive days if the employing motor carrier
does not operate commercial motor vehicles every day of the week; or

(2) Having been on duty 70 hours in any period of 8 consecutive days if the employing motor
carrier operates commercial motor vehicles every day of the week.


----------------------------------------------------------------------


§ 395.8 Driver's record of duty status.
---------------------------------------

(a)(1) Except for a private motor carrier of passengers (nonbusiness), as defined in § 390.5
of this subchapter, a motor carrier subject to the requirements of this part must require
each driver used by the motor carrier to record the driver's duty status for each 24-hour
period using the method prescribed in paragraphs (a)(1)(i) through (iii) of this section, as
applicable.

(i) Subject to paragraph (a)(1)(ii) of this section, a motor carrier operating commercial
motor vehicles must install and require each of its drivers to use an ELD to record the
driver's duty status in accordance with subpart B of this part no later than December 18,
2017.

(ii)(A) A motor carrier may require a driver to record the driver's duty status manually in
accordance with this section, rather than require the use of an ELD, if the driver is
operating a commercial motor vehicle:

(1) In a manner requiring completion of a record of duty status on not more than 8 days
within any 30-day period;

(2) In a driveaway-towaway operation in which the vehicle being driven is part of the
shipment being delivered;

(3) In a driveaway-towaway operation in which the vehicle being transported is a motor home
or a recreation vehicle trailer; or

(4) That was manufactured before model year 2000, as reflected in the vehicle identification
number as shown on the vehicle's registration.

(B) The record of duty status must be recorded in duplicate for each 24-hour period for
which recording is required. The duty status shall be recorded on a specified grid, as shown
in paragraph (g) of this section. The grid and the requirements of paragraph (d) of this
section may be combined with any company form.

(iii) Subject to paragraphs (a)(1)(i) and (ii) of this section, until December 18, 2017, a
motor carrier operating commercial motor vehicles shall require each of its drivers to
record the driver's record of duty status:

(A) Using an ELD that meets the requirements of subpart B of this part; or

(B) Manually, recorded on a specified grid as shown in paragraph (g) of this section. The
grid and the requirements of paragraph (d) of this section may be combined with any company
form. The record of duty status must be recorded in duplicate for each 24-hour period for
which recording is required.

(2) A driver operating a commercial motor vehicle must:

(i) Record the driver's duty status using one of the methods under paragraph (a)(1) of this
section; and

(ii) Submit the driver's record of duty status to the motor carrier within 13 days of the
24-hour period to which the record pertains.

(b) The duty status shall be recorded as follows:

(1) “Off duty” or “OFF.”

(2) “Sleeper berth” or “SB” (only if a sleeper berth used).

(3) “Driving” or “D.”

(4) “On-duty not driving” or “ON.”

(c) For each change of duty status (e.g., the place of reporting for work, starting to
drive, on-duty not driving and where released from work), the name of the city, town, or
village, with State abbreviation, shall be recorded.

If a change of duty status occurs at a location other than a city, town, or village, show
one of the following: (1) The highway number and nearest milepost followed by the name of
the nearest city, town, or village and State abbreviation, (2) the highway number and the
name of the service plaza followed by the name of the nearest city, town, or village and
State abbreviation, or (3) the highway numbers of the nearest two intersecting roadways
followed by the name of the nearest city, town, or village and State abbreviation.

(d) The following information must be included on the form in addition to the grid:

(1) Date;

(2) Total miles driving today;

(3) Truck or tractor and trailer number;

(4) Name of carrier;

(5) Driver's signature/certification;

(6) 24-hour period starting time (e.g. midnight, 9:00 a.m., noon, 3:00 p.m.);

(7) Main office address;

(8) Remarks;

(9) Name of co-driver;

(10) Total hours (far right edge of grid);

(11) Shipping document number(s), or name of shipper and commodity;

(e)(1) No driver or motor carrier may make a false report in connection with a duty status.

(2) No driver or motor carrier may disable, deactivate, disengage, jam, or otherwise block
or degrade a signal transmission or reception, or reengineer, reprogram, or otherwise tamper
with an ELD so that the device does not accurately record and retain required data.

(3) No driver or motor carrier may permit or require another person to disable, deactivate,
disengage, jam, or otherwise block or degrade a signal transmission or reception, or
reengineer, reprogram, or otherwise tamper with an ELD so that the device does not
accurately record and retain required data.

(f) The driver's activities shall be recorded in accordance with the following provisions:

(1) Entries to be current. Drivers shall keep their records of duty status current to the
time shown for the last change of duty status.

(2) Entries made by driver only. All entries relating to a driver's duty status must be
legible and made by the driver.

(3) Date. The month, day and year for the beginning of each 24-hour period shall be shown on
the form containing the driver's duty status record.

(4) Total miles driving today. Total mileage driven during the 24-hour period shall be
recorded on the form containing the driver's duty status record.

(5) Commercial motor vehicle identification. The driver shall show the number assigned by
the motor carrier, or the license number and licensing State of each commercial motor
vehicle operated during each 24-hour period on his/her record of duty status. The driver of
an articulated (combination) commercial motor vehicle shall show the number assigned by the
motor carrier, or the license number and licensing State of each motor vehicle used in each
commercial motor vehicle combination operated during that 24-hour period on his/her record
of duty status.

(6) Name of motor carrier. The name(s) of the motor carrier(s) for which work is performed
shall be shown on the form containing the driver's record of duty status. When work is
performed for more than one motor carrier during the same 24-hour period, the beginning and
finishing time, showing a.m. or p.m., worked for each motor carrier shall be shown after
each motor carrier's name. Drivers of leased commercial motor vehicles shall show the name
of the motor carrier performing the transportation.

(7) Signature/certification. The driver shall certify to the correctness of all entries by
signing the form containing the driver's duty status record with his/her legal name or name
of record. The driver's signature certifies that all entries required by this section made
by the driver are true and correct.

(8) Time base to be used. (i) The driver's duty status record shall be prepared, maintained,
and submitted using the time standard in effect at the driver's home terminal, for a 24-hour
period beginning with the time specified by the motor carrier for that driver's home
terminal.

(ii) The term “7 or 8 consecutive days” means the 7 or 8 consecutive 24-hour periods as
designated by the carrier for the driver's home terminal.

(iii) The 24-hour period starting time must be identified on the driver's duty status
record. One-hour increments must appear on the graph, be identified, and preprinted. The
words “Midnight” and “Noon” must appear above or beside the appropriate one-hour increment.

(9) Main office address. The motor carrier's main office address shall be shown on the form
containing the driver's duty status record.

(10) Recording days off duty. Two or more consecutive 24-hour periods off duty may be
recorded on one duty status record.

(11) Total hours. The total hours in each duty status: off duty other than in a sleeper
berth; off duty in a sleeper berth; driving, and on duty not driving, shall be entered to
the right of the grid, the total of such entries shall equal 24 hours.

(12) Shipping document number(s) or name of shipper and commodity shall be shown on the
driver's record of duty status.

(g) Graph grid. The following graph grid must be incorporated into a motor carrier
recordkeeping system which must also contain the information required in paragraph (d) of
this section.

(h) Graph grid preparation. The graph grid may be used horizontally or vertically and shall
be completed as follows:

(1) Off duty. Except for time spent resting in a sleeper berth, a continuous line shall be
drawn between the appropriate time markers to record the period(s) of time when the driver
is not on duty, is not required to be in readiness to work, or is not under any
responsibility for performing work.

(2) Sleeper berth. A continuous line shall be drawn between the appropriate time markers to
record the period(s) of time off duty resting in a sleeper berth, as defined in § 395.2. (If
a non-sleeper berth operation, sleeper berth need not be shown on the grid.)

(3) Driving. A continuous line shall be drawn between the appropriate time markers to record
the period(s) of driving time, as defined in § 395.2.

(4) On duty not driving. A continuous line shall be drawn between the appropriate time
markers to record the period(s) of time on duty not driving specified in § 395.2.

(5) Location—remarks. The name of the city, town, or village, with State abbreviation where
each change of duty status occurs shall be recorded.

If a change of duty status occurs at a location other than a city, town, or village, show
one of the following: (1) The highway number and nearest milepost followed by the name of
the nearest city, town, or village and State abbreviation, (2) the highway number and the
name of the service plaza followed by the name of the nearest city, town, or village and
State abbreviation, or (3) the highway numbers of the nearest two intersecting roadways
followed by the name of the nearest city, town, or village and State abbreviation.

(i) [Reserved]

(j) Drivers used by more than one motor carrier. (1) When the services of a driver are used
by more than one motor carrier during any 24-hour period in effect at the driver's home
terminal, the driver shall submit a copy of the record of duty status to each motor carrier.
The record shall include:

(i) All duty time for the entire 24-hour period;

(ii) The name of each motor carrier served by the driver during that period; and

(iii) The beginning and finishing time, including a.m. or p.m., worked for each carrier.

(2) Motor carriers, when using a driver for the first time or intermittently, shall obtain
from the driver a signed statement giving the total time on duty during the immediately
preceding 7 days and the time at which the driver was last relieved from duty prior to
beginning work for the motor carriers.

(k) Retention of driver's record of duty status and supporting documents. (1) A motor
carrier shall retain records of duty status and supporting documents required under this
part for each of its drivers for a period of not less than 6 months from the date of
receipt.

(2) The driver shall retain a copy of each record of duty status for the previous 7
consecutive days which shall be in his/her possession and available for inspection while on
duty.

Driver's Record of Duty Status.

The graph grid, when incorporated as part of any form used by a motor carrier, must be of
sufficient size to be legible. The following executed specimen grid illustrates how a
driver's duty status should be recorded for a trip from Richmond, Virginia, to Newark, New
Jersey. The grid reflects the midnight to midnight 24 hour period.

Graph Grid (Midnight to Midnight Operation) The driver in this instance reported for duty at
the motor carrier's terminal. The driver reported for work at 6 a.m., helped load, checked
with dispatch, made a pretrip inspection, and performed other duties until 7:30 a.m. when
the driver began driving. At 9 a.m. the driver had a minor accident in Fredericksburg,
Virginia, and spent one half hour handling details with the local police. The driver arrived
at the company's Baltimore, Maryland, terminal at noon and went to lunch while minor repairs
were made to the tractor. At 1 p.m. the driver resumed the trip and made a delivery in
Philadelphia, Pennsylvania, between 3 p.m. and 3:30 p.m. at which time the driver started
driving again. Upon arrival at Cherry Hill, New Jersey, at 4 p.m., the driver entered the
sleeper berth for a rest break until 5:45 p.m. at which time the driver resumed driving
again. At 7 p.m. the driver arrived at the company's terminal in Newark, New Jersey. Between
7 p.m. and 8 p.m. the driver prepared the required paperwork including completing the
driver's record of duty status, driver vehicle inspection report, insurance report for the
Fredericksburg, Virginia accident, checked for the next day's dispatch, etc. At 8 p.m., the
driver went off duty.


----------------------------------------------------------------------


§ 395.13 Drivers ordered out of service.
----------------------------------------

(a) Authority to order drivers out of service. Every special agent of the Federal Motor
Carrier Safety Administration (as defined in appendix B to part 390 of this chapter) is
authorized to order a driver out of service and to notify the motor carrier of that order,
upon finding at the time and place of examination that the driver has violated the out-of-
service criteria as set forth in paragraph (b) of this section.

(b) Out of service criteria. (1) No driver shall drive after being on duty in excess of the
maximum periods permitted by this part.

(2) No driver required to maintain a record of duty status under § 395.8 shall fail to have
a record of duty status current on the day of examination and for the prior seven
consecutive days.

(3) Exception. A driver failing only to have possession of a record of duty status current
on the day of examination and the prior day, but has completed records of duty status up to
that time (previous 6 days), will be given the opportunity to make the duty status record
current.

(c) Responsibilities of motor carriers. (1) No motor carrier shall:

(i) Require or permit a driver who has been ordered out of service to operate a commercial
motor vehicle until that driver may lawfully do so under the rules in this part.

(ii) Require a driver who has been ordered out of service for failure to prepare a record of
duty status to operate a commercial motor vehicle until that driver has been off duty for
the appropriate number of consecutive hours required by this part and is in compliance with
this section. The appropriate consecutive hours off duty may include sleeper berth time.

(2) A motor carrier shall complete the “Motor Carrier Certification of Action Taken” portion
of the form “Driver/Vehicle Examination Report” and deliver the copy of the form either
personally or by mail to the Division Administrator or State Director Federal Motor Carrier
Safety Administration, at the address specified upon the form within 15 days following the
date of examination. If the motor carrier mails the form, delivery is made on the date it is
postmarked.

(d) Responsibilities of the driver. (1) No driver who has been ordered out of service shall
operate a commercial motor vehicle until that driver may lawfully do so under the rules of
this part.

(2) No driver who has been ordered out of service, for failing to prepare a record of duty
status, shall operate a commercial motor vehicle until the driver has been off duty for the
appropriate number of consecutive hours required by this part and is in compliance with this
section.

(3) A driver to whom a form has been tendered ordering the driver out of service shall
within 24 hours thereafter deliver or mail the copy to a person or place designated by the
motor carrier to receive it.

(4) Section 395.13 does not alter the hazardous materials requirements prescribed in § 397.5
pertaining to attendance and surveillance of commercial motor vehicles.
