
--- page 1 ---
Form MCSA-5875 OMB No.: 2126-0006 Expiration Date: 03/31/2028
Page 1
U.S. Department of Transportation
Federal Motor Carrier
Safety Administration
Rev 3/27/2025
Public Burden Statement
A Federal agency may not conduct or sponsor, and a person is not required to respond to, nor shall a person be subject to a penalty for failure to comply with a collection of information subject to the requirements of 
the Paperwork Reduction Act unless that collection of information displays a current valid OMB Control Number. The OMB Control Number for this information collection is 2126-0006. Public reporting for this collection 
of information is estimated to be approximately 25 minutes per response, including the time for reviewing instructions, gathering the data needed, and completing and reviewing the collection of information. All 
responses to this collection of information are mandatory. Send comments regarding this burden estimate or any other aspect of this collection of information, including suggestions for reducing this burden to: 
Medical Programs Division, Federal Motor Carrier Safety Administration, 1200 New Jersey Avenue, SE, Washington, D.C. 20590.
Medical Examination Report Form 
(for Commercial Driver Medical Certification)
Middle Initial:Last Name:
Street Address:
Driver’s License Number:
E-Mail (optional): CLP/CDL Applicant/Holder*:
Has your USDOT/FMCSA medical certificate ever been denied or issued for less than 2 years?
Have you ever had surgery? If “yes, ” please list and explain below.
Are you currently taking medications (prescription, over-the-counter, herbal remedies, diet supplements)? 
If “yes, ” please describe below.
First Name:
City: State/Province:
Issuing State/Province:
Zip Code:
Phone:
Driver ID Verified By**:
SECTION 1. Driver Information (to be filled out by the driver)
Date of Birth: Age:
Yes
Yes
Ye s
Ye s
No
No
No
No
Not Sure
Not Sure
Not Sure
**This document contains sensitive information and is for official use only. Improper handling of this information could negatively affect individuals. Handle and secure this 
information appropriately to prevent inadvertent disclosure by keeping the documents under the control of authorized persons. Properly dispose of this document when 
no longer required to be maintained by regulatory requirements.**
MEDICAL RECORD #
(or sticker)
PERSONAL INFORMATION
DRIVER HEALTH HISTORY
*CLP/CDL Applicant/Holder: See instructions for definitions. **Driver ID Verified By: Record what type of photo ID was used to verify the identity of the driver, e.g., CDL, driver’s license, passport. 
--- page 2 ---
Form MCSA-5875 OMB No.: 2126-0006 Expiration Date: 03/31/2028
Page 2
Last Name: First Name: DOB: Exam Date:
DRIVER HEALTH HISTORY (continued)
CMV DRIVER’S SIGNATURE
DRIVER HEALTH HISTORY REVIEW
Do you have or have you ever had: Ye s Ye sNo No
Not 
Sure
Not 
Sure
1. Head/brain injuries or illnesses (e.g., concussion) 16.  Dizziness, headaches, numbness, tingling, or memory 
loss
17. Unexplained weight loss
18. Stroke, mini-stroke (TIA), paralysis, or weakness
19. Missing or limited use of arm, hand, finger, leg, foot, toe
20. Neck or back problems
21. Bone, muscle, joint, or nerve problems
22. Blood clots or bleeding problems
23. Cancer
24. Chronic (long-term) infection or other chronic diseases
25.  Sleep disorders, pauses in breathing while asleep, 
daytime sleepiness, loud snoring
26. Have you ever had a sleep test (e.g., sleep apnea)?
27. Have you ever spent a night in the hospital?
28. Have you ever had a broken bone?
29. Have you ever used or do you now use tobacco?
30. Do you currently drink alcohol?
31.  Have you used an illegal substance within the past 
two years?
32.  Have you ever failed a drug test or been dependent 
on an illegal substance?
2. Seizures/epilepsy
3. Eye problems (except glasses or contacts)
4. Ear and/or hearing problems
5.  Heart disease, heart attack, bypass, or other heart 
problems
6.  Pacemaker, stents, implantable devices, or other heart 
procedures
7. High blood pressure
8. High cholesterol
9.  Chronic (long-term) cough, shortness of breath, or 
other breathing problems
10. Lung disease (e.g., asthma)
11.  Kidney problems, kidney stones, or pain/problems 
with urination
12. Stomach, liver, or digestive problems
13. Diabetes or blood sugar problems
Insulin used
14.  Anxiety, depression, nervousness, other mental health 
problems
15. Fainting or passing out
Other health condition(s) not described above:
Did you answer “yes” to any of questions 1-32? If so, please comment further on those health conditions below:
Ye s
Ye s
No
No
Not Sure
Not Sure
I certify that the above information is accurate and complete. I understand that inaccurate, false or missing information may invalidate the examination 
and my Medical Examiner’s Certificate, that submission of fraudulent or intentionally false information is a violation of 49 CFR 390.35, and that submission 
of fraudulent or intentionally false information may subject me to civil or criminal penalties under 49 CFR 390.37 and 49 CFR 386 Appendices A and B.
Review and discuss pertinent driver answers and any available medical records. Comment on the driver’s responses to the “health history” questions that may affect the 
driver’s safe operation of a commercial motor vehicle (CMV).
Driver’s Signature: Date:
SECTION 2. Examination Report (to be filled out by the medical examiner)
--- page 3 ---
Form MCSA-5875 OMB No.: 2126-0006 Expiration Date: 03/31/2028
Page 3
Last Name: First Name: DOB: Exam Date:
TESTING
PHYSICAL EXAMINATION
Pulse Rate: Height: Weight:feet poundsinchesPulse rhythm regular: Yes No
Blood Pressure Systolic Diastolic
Sitting
Second reading 
(optional)
Urinalysis Sp. Gr. Protein Blood Sugar
Urinalysis is required. 
Numerical readings 
must be recorded.
Other testing if indicated
Vision
Acuity
Body System
1. General 8. Abdomen
2. Skin 9. Genito-urinary system including hernias
3. Eyes 10. Back/spine
4. Ears 11. Extremities/joints
5. Mouth/throat 12. Neurological system including reflexes
6. Cardiovascular 13. Gait
7. Lungs/chest
Discuss any abnormal answers in detail in the space below and indicate whether it would affect the driver’s ability to operate a CMV.
Enter applicable item number before each comment.
14. Vascular system
Body SystemNormal NormalAbnormal Abnormal
Right Eye:
Left Eye:
Both Eyes:
20/
20/
20/
20/
20/
20/
Right Eye:
Left Eye:
degrees
degrees
Uncorrected Corrected Horizontal Field of Vision Check if hearing aid used for test:
Right Ear:
Average (right): Average (left):
500 Hz 500 Hz1000 Hz 1000 Hz2000 Hz 2000 Hz
Left Ear:
Whisper Test Results
Audiometric Test Results
Right Ear Left Ear
Record distance (in feet) from driver at which a forced 
whispered voice can first be heard
Hearing
OR
Protein, blood, or sugar in the urine may be an indication for further testing to  
rule out any underlying medical problem.
Standard: Must first perceive whispered voice at not less than 5 feet OR average 
hearing loss of less than or equal to 40 dB, in better ear (with or without hearing aid).
Standard is at least 20/40 acuity (Snellen) in each eye with or without correction. 
At least 70° field of vision in horizontal meridian measured in each eye. The use of 
corrective lenses should be noted on the Medical Examiner’s Certificate.
Ye s No
Applicant can recognize and distinguish among traffic control 
signals and devices showing red, green, and amber colors
The presence of a certain condition may not necessarily disqualify a driver, particularly if the condition is controlled adequately, is not likely to 
worsen, or is readily amenable to treatment. Even if a condition does not disqualify a driver, the Medical Examiner may consider deferring the driver 
temporarily. Also, the driver should be advised to take the necessary steps to correct the condition as soon as possible, particularly if neglecting the 
condition could result in a more serious illness that might affect driving.
Check the body systems for abnormalities.
Monocular vision
Referred to ophthalmologist or optometrist?
Received documentation from ophthalmologist or optometrist?
Right Ear Left Ear Neither
--- page 4 ---
Form MCSA-5875 OMB No.: 2126-0006 Expiration Date: 03/31/2028
Page 4
Last Name:
Medical Examiner’s Signature:
Medical Examiner’s Name (please print or type):
Medical Examiner’s Address:
Medical Examiner’s Telephone Number:
Medical Examiner’s State License, Certificate, or Registration Number:
City:
Date Certificate Signed:
Medical Examiner’s Certificate Expiration Date:National Registry Number:
State:
Issuing State:
Zip Code:
First Name: DOB: Exam Date:
MEDICAL EXAMINER DETERMINATION (Federal)
Please complete only one of the following (Federal or State) Medical Examiner Determination sections:
Use this section for examinations performed in accordance with the Federal Motor Carrier Safety Regulations (49 CFR 391.41-391.49):
Does not meet standards (specify reason):
Determination pending (specify reason):
Incomplete examination (specify reason):
Meets standards, but periodic monitoring required (specify reason):
Wearing corrective lenses
MD
Accompanied by a Skill Performance Evaluation (SPE) Certificate
Driving within an exempt intracity zone (see 49 CFR 391.62) (Federal)
Wearing hearing aid
DO
Ac
companied by a waiver/exemption (specify type):
Physician Assistant Chiropractor Advanced Practice Nurse
Return to medical exam office for follow-up on (must be 45 days or less):
Other Practitioner (specify):
Medical Examination Report amended (specify reason):
3 months 6 months 1 year other (specify):Driver qualified for:
Meets standards in 49 CFR 391.41; qualifies for 2-year certificate
(if amended) Medical Examiner’s Signature: Date:
If the driver meets the standards outlined in 49 CFR 391.41, then complete a Medical Examiner’ s Certificate as stated in 49 CFR 391.43(h), as appropriate.
I have performed this evaluation for certification. I have personally reviewed all available records and recorded information pertaining to this 
evaluation, and attest that, to the best of my knowledge, I believe it to be true and correct.
--- page 5 ---
Form MCSA-5875 OMB No.: 2126-0006 Expiration Date: 03/31/2028
Page 5
Last Name: First Name: DOB: Exam Date:
MEDICAL EXAMINER DETERMINATION (State)
Use this section for examinations performed in accordance with the Federal Motor Carrier Safety Regulations (49 CFR 391.41-391.49) with any applicable State 
variances (which will only be valid for intrastate operations):
Does not meet standards in 49 CFR 391.41 with any applicable State variances (specify reason):
Meets standards in 49 CFR 391.41 with any applicable State variances
Meets standards, but periodic monitoring required (specify reason):
3 months 6 months 1 year other (specify):Driver qualified for:
Wearing corrective lenses Wearing hearing aid Accompanied by a waiver/exemption (specify type):
Accompanied by a Skill Performance Evaluation (SPE) Certificate Grandfathered from State requirements (State)
If the driver meets the standards outlined in 49 CFR 391.41, with applicable State variances, then complete a Medical Examiner’ s Certificate, as appropriate.
I have performed this evaluation for certification. I have personally reviewed all available records and recorded information pertaining to this 
evaluation, and attest that, to the best of my knowledge, I believe it to be true and correct.
Medical Examiner’s Signature:
Medical Examiner’s Name (please print or type):
Medical Examiner’s Address:
Medical Examiner’s Telephone Number:
Medical Examiner’s State License, Certificate, or Registration Number:
City:
Date Certificate Signed:
Medical Examiner’s Certificate Expiration Date:National Registry Number:
State:
Issuing State:
Zip Code:
MD DO Physician Assistant Chiropractor Advanced Practice Nurse
Other Practitioner (specify):
--- page 6 ---
Instructions MCSA-5875
Page 6
Instructions for Completing the Medical Examination Report Form (MCSA-5875)
I. Step-By-Step Instructions
Driver:
Section 1: Driver Information
• Personal Information: Please complete this section using your name as written on your driver’s license,
your current address and phone number, your date of birth, age, driver’s license number and issuing state.
◦ CLP/CDL Applicant/Holder
: Check “yes” if you are a commercial learner’s permit (CLP) or commercial
driver’s license (CDL) holder, or are applying for a CLP or CDL. CDL means a license issued by a State
or the District of Columbia which authorizes the individual to operate a class of a commercial motor
vehicle (CMV). A CMV that requires a CDL is one that: (1) has a gross combination weight rating or
gross combination weight of 26,001 pounds or more inclusive of a towed unit with a gross vehicle
weight rating (GVWR) or gross vehicle weight (GVW) of more than 10,000 pounds; or (2) has a GVWR
or GVW of 26,001 pounds or more; or (3) is designed to transport 16 or more passengers, including
the driver; or (4) is used to transport either hazardous materials requiring hazardous materials
placards on the vehicle or any quantity of a select agent or toxin.
◦ Drive
r ID Verified By: The Medical Examiner/staff completes this item and notes the type of photo ID
used to verify the driver’s identity such as, commercial driver’s license, driver’s license, or passport, etc.
◦ Has your USDOT/FMCSA medical c
ertificate ever been denied or issued for less than two years?
Please check the correct box “yes” or “no” and if you aren’t sure check the “not sure” box.
• Driver Health History:
◦ Have you ev
er had surgery: Please check “yes” if you have ever had surgery and provide a written
explanation of the details (type of surgery, date of surgery, etc.)
◦ Are you curren
tly taking medications (prescription, over-the-counter, herbal remedies, diet
supplements): Please check “yes” if you are taking any diet supplements, herbal remedies, or
prescription or over the counter medications. In the box below the question, indicate the name of
the medication and the dosage.
◦ #1-32: P
lease complete this section by checking the “yes” box to indicate that you have, or have ever
had, the health condition listed or the “No” box if you have not. Check the “not sure” box if you are
unsure.
◦ Other Health Conditions not described ab
ove: If you have, or have had, any other health condi-
tions not listed in the section above, check “Yes” and in the box provided and list those condition(s).
◦ Any yes answers t
o questions #1-32 above: If you have answered “yes” to any of the questions in
the Driver Health History section above, please explain your answers further in the box below the
question. For example, if you answered “yes” to question #5 regarding heart disease, heart attack,
bypass, or other heart problem, indicate which type of heart condition. If you checked “yes” to
question #23 regarding cancer, indicate the type of cancer. Please add any information that will be
helpful to the Medical Examiner.
• CMV Driver Signature and Date: Please read the certification statement, sign and date it, indicating
that the information you provided in Section 1 is accurate and complete.
--- page 7 ---
Instructions MCSA-5875
Page 7
Medical Examiner:
Section 2: Examination Report
• Driver Health History Review: Review answers provided by the driver in the driver health history section
and discuss any “yes” and “not sure” responses. In addition, be sure to compare the medication list to the
health history responses ensuring that the medication list matches the medical conditions noted. Explore
with the driver any answers that seem unclear. Record any information that the driver omitted. As the
Medical Examiner conducting the driver’s physical examination you are required to complete the entire
medical examination even if you detect a medical condition that you consider disqualifying, such as
deafness. Medical Examiners are expected to determine the driver’s physical qualification for operating
a commercial vehicle safely. Thus, if you find a disqualifying condition for which a driver may receive a
Federal Motor Carrier Safety Administration medical exemption, please record that on the driver’s Medical
Examiner’s Certificate, Form MCSA-5876, as well as on the Medical Examination Report Form, MCSA-5875.
• Testing:
◦ Pulse r
ate and rhythm, height, and weight: record these as indicated on the form.
◦ Blood Pr
essure: record the blood pressure (systolic and diastolic) of the driver being examined. A
second reading is optional and should be recorded if found to be necessary.
◦ Urinaly
sis: record the numerical readings for the specific gravity, protein, blood and sugar.
◦ Vision: The cur
rent vision standard is provided on the form. When other than the Snellen chart is
used, give test results in Snellen-comparable values. When recording distance vision, use 20 feet
as normal. Record the vision acuity results and indicate if the driver can recognize and distinguish
among traffic control signals and devices showing red, green, and amber colors; has monocular
vision; has been referred to an ophthalmologist or optometrist; and if documentation has been
received from an ophthalmologist or optometrist.
◦ Hearing
: The current hearing standard is provided on the form. Hearing can be tested using either a
whisper test or audiometric test. Record the test results in the corresponding section for the test used.
• Physical Examination: Check the body systems for abnormalities and indicate normal or abnormal
for each body system listed. Discuss any abnormal answers in detail in the space provided and indicate
whether it would affect the driver’s ability to safely operate a commercial motor vehicle.
In this next section, you will be completing either the Federal or State determination, not both.
• Medical Examiner Determination (Federal): Use this section for examinations performed in
accordance with the FMCSRs (49 CFR 391.41-391.49). Complete the medical examiner determination
section completely. When determining a driver’s physical qualification, please note that English language
proficiency (49 CFR part 391.11: General qualifications of drivers) is not factored into that determination.
◦ Does not meet standards: S
elect this option when a driver is determined to be not qualified and
provide an explanation of why the driver does not meet the standards in 49 CFR 391.41.
◦ Meets standards in 49 CFR 391.41
; qualifies for 2-year certification: Select this option when a
driver is determined to be qualified and will be issued a 2-year Medical Examiner’s Certificate.
--- page 8 ---
Instructions MCSA-5875
Page 8
◦ Meets standards, but periodic monitoring is required: Select this option when a driver is
determined t
o be qualified but needs periodic monitoring and provide an explanation of why
periodic monitoring is required. Select the corresponding time frame that the driver is qualified for,
and if selecting “other” specify the time frame.
 — Determination that driver meets standards: Select all categories that apply to the driver’s
certification (e.g., wearing corrective lenses, accompanied by a waiver/exemption, driving within 
an exempt intracity zone, etc.).
◦ Deter
mination pending: Select this option when more information is needed to make a qualification
decision and specify a date, on or before the 45 day expiration date, for the driver to return to the
medical exam office for follow-up. This will allow for a delay of the qualification decision for as many
as 45 days. If the disposition of the pending examination is not updated via the National Registry on or
before the 45 day expiration date, FMCSA will notify the examining medical examiner and the driver in
writing that the examination is no longer valid and that the driver is required to be re-examined.
 — MER amended: A Medical Examination Report Form (MER), MCSA-5875, may only be amended
while in determination pending status for situations where new information (e.g., test results, 
etc.) has been received or there has been a change in the driver’s medical status since the initial 
examination, but prior to a final qualification determination. Select this option when a Medical 
Examination Report Form, MCSA-5875, is being amended; provide the reason for the amendment, 
sign and date. In addition, initial and date any changes made on the Medical Examination Report 
Form, MCSA-5875. A Medical Examination Report Form, MCSA-5875, cannot be amended after 
an examination has been in determination pending status for more than 45 days or after a final 
qualification determination has been made. The driver is required to obtain a new physical 
examination and a new Medical Examination Report Form, MCSA-5875, should be completed.
◦ Incomplete e
xamination: Select this when the physical examination is not completed for any
reason (e.g., driver decides they do not want to continue with the examination and leaves) other than
situations outlined under determination pending.
◦ Medical Examiner informa
tion, signature and date: Provide your name, address, phone number,
occupation, license, certificate, or registration number and issuing state, national registry number,
signature and date.
◦ Medical Examiner’
s Certificate Expiration Date: Enter the date the driver’s Medical Examiner’s
Certificate (MEC) expires.
• Medical Examiner Determination (State): Use this section for examinations performed in accordance
with the FMCSRs (49 CFR 391.41-391.49) with any applicable State variances (which will only be valid for
intrastate operations). Complete the medical examiner determination section completely.
◦ Does not meet standards in 49 CFR 391.41
 with any applicable State variances: Select this
option when a driver is determined to be not qualified and provide an explanation of why the driver
does not meet the standards in 49 CFR 391.41 with any applicable State variances.
◦ Meets standards in 49 CFR 391.41
 with any applicable State variances: Select this option when a
driver is determined to be qualified and will be issued a 2-year Medical Examiner’s Certificate.
--- page 9 ---
Instructions MCSA-5875
Page 9
II.  If updating an existing exam, you must resubmit the new exam results, via the Medical Examination
Results Form, MCSA-5850, to the National Registry, and the most recent dated exam will take precedence.
III.  To obtain additional information regarding this form go to the Medical Program’s page on the Federal
Motor Carrier Safety Administration’s website at http://www.fmcsa.dot.gov/regulations/medical.
◦ Meets standards, but p
eriodic monitoring is required: Select this option when a driver is deter-
mined to be qualified but needs periodic monitoring and provide an explanation of why periodic
monitoring is required. Select the corresponding time frame that the driver is qualified for, and if
selecting “other” specify the time frame.
 — Determination that driver meets standards: Select all categories that apply to the driver’s
certification (e.g., wearing corrective lenses, accompanied by a waiver/exemption, etc.).
◦ Medical Examiner informa
tion, signature and date: Provide your name, address, phone number,
occupation, license, certificate, or registration number and issuing state, national registry number,
signature and date.
◦ Medical Examiner’
s Certificate Expiration Date: Enter the date the driver’s Medical Examiner’s
Certificate (MEC) expires.