
--- page 1 ---
33412 Federal Register / Vol. 85, No. 105 / Monday, June 1, 2020 / Rules and Regulations 
15 American Trucking Ass’n v. FMCSA, 724 F.3d 
243, 253 (D.C. Cir. 2013). 
16 ‘‘The Impact of Driving, Non-Driving Work, 
and Rest Breaks on Driving Performance in 
Commercial Motor Vehicle Operations.’’ Blanco, et 
al. (2011). Available in the docket for this 
rulemaking. 
Agency argued that, on their face, the 
safety benefits of an off-duty 30-minute 
break requirement applied to short-haul 
operations as well as long-haul. The 
D.C. Circuit Court of Appeals, however, 
found that applying the 30-minute break 
requirement to all drivers despite the 
clear distinctions between short-haul 
and long-haul operations was not 
justified in the record.
15 The Agency has 
received no new evidence to compel a 
different finding. 
Moreover, there is no safety basis for 
expanding the definition of short-haul 
but continuing to require a 30-minute 
break for the subset of short-haul CDL 
drivers who operate between 100 and 
150 air miles, or who drive between the 
12th and 14th hour of coming on duty. 
To the extent that the debate and 
comments about the safety impact of 
relieving this group of drivers of the 
need to comply with the 30-minute 
break provision lingers, FMCSA 
believes it is best resolved below in the 
Agency’s decision concerning changes 
to the 30-minute break. 
The changes adopted in this final rule 
result in the break being required after 
8 consecutive hours of driving time, 
rather than 8 hours after coming on- 
duty. That change alone would make 
the 30-minute break inapplicable in 
nearly all short-haul operations in that 
they would not drive 8 consecutive 
hours without having a break of at least 
30 minutes from the driving task. 
FMCSA reviewed the Blanco study 
and notes that it found that any type of 
break (both off-duty, and on-duty not 
driving) was beneficial to the driver.
16 
Furthermore, it has been demonstrated 
in multiple research efforts that time on 
task is a leading contributor to driver 
fatigue. The requirement for a break 
after 8 hours of consecutive driving time 
addresses this concern more adequately 
than requiring a break after 8 hours of 
coming on-duty, and short-haul drivers 
have frequent breaks from driving 
throughout the day. Therefore, FMCSA 
disagrees with the commenters who 
stated that allowing short-haul to be 
excepted from the requirement would 
have an adverse impact on safety and 
continues to except short-haul drivers 
from the 30-minute break requirement 
despite the extension of the duty day to 
14 hours. 
Comments about the Relationship 
Between Changes to the Short-Haul 
Exception, Adverse Driving Conditions 
Exception and ELD Mandate. CVSA and 
Schneider National Carriers, Inc. stated 
that short-haul carriers using the 
proposed exception without using an 
ELD should not be eligible for workday 
extensions, like that granted for adverse 
driving conditions. The commenters 
reasoned that short-haul drivers would 
be familiar with the routes and weather 
in their operating territory and would be 
able to abuse the program if allowed to 
claim an extra 2 hours of driving time. 
A few commenters, including the 
Trucking Alliance, U.S. Chamber of 
Commerce, industry associations, and 
motor carriers, stated FMCSA should 
require ELDs regardless of the distance 
traveled. 
TruckerNation suggested that FMCSA 
include clear regulatory language 
explaining that short-haul operators are 
exempt from the ELD mandate and are 
only required to prepare and maintain 
time cards. The Trucking Alliance 
suggested harmonization between the 
interstate CDL short-haul operations 
exception and the interstate non-CDL 
short-haul operations. An industry 
association developed a ‘‘Daily Driver’’ 
concept as an alternative to the short- 
haul exception and suggested specific 
language. 
FMCSA Response: FMCSA believes 
that the revised short-haul exception 
adopted today maintains safety while 
providing motor carriers and drivers 
greater flexibility. The Agency is not 
persuaded that various alternatives 
suggested by commenters would 
achieve that goal. Requiring ELDs for 
any subgroup of the short-haul carriers 
would essentially negate the short-haul 
exception because the daily preparation 
of RODS would make the regulatory 
scheme for short-haul operations largely 
the same as other operations. The 
extension of the workday from 12 to 14 
hours for returning to the original work 
reporting location without increasing 
the existing 11 hours of driving time 
will put short-haul operations on 
essentially the same footing as long-haul 
operations with the distinction being 
that they must return to the normal 
work reporting location. Increasing the 
100 air-mile radius distance to 150 air- 
miles will allow short-haul drivers 
greater flexibility. Together, these 
provisions will reduce potential 
pressure on drivers for timely 
completion of their duty day. 
Drivers who normally operate under 
the short-haul exception but 
occasionally find it necessary to exceed 
those limits can already drive within a 
14-hour window for up to 8 days in any 
30-consecutive day period without 
ELDs, provided they utilize paper 
RODS, or for more than 8 days in any 
30-day consecutive period with an ELD. 
Whether to remain within or exceed the 
short-haul limits is strictly a business 
decision on the part of the carrier, and 
the Agency has not identified safety 
issues associated with the use of either 
of these options. 
The NPRM did not propose to 
harmonize the short-haul rules for CDL 
and non-CDL drivers (§ 395.1(e)(1) and 
(2), respectively) concerning the 
allowance of a 16-hour window up to 2 
days in a 7 consecutive day period for 
non-CDL holders. The Agency has not 
witnessed a demand for that level of 
flexibility since implementing the ELD 
mandate either in the form of requests 
for guidance or clarifications, or 
applications for exemptions. Therefore, 
the Agency did not propose such a 
change in the NPRM and considers the 
matter to be beyond the scope of this 
rulemaking. 
Commenters Suggesting Industry- 
Specific Exceptions. A few trade groups 
requested that FMCSA allow industry- 
specific exceptions for certain short- 
haul operations, including for 
hazardous materials, concrete pumps, 
construction vehicles, and waste and 
recycling. The National Lumber and 
Building Material Dealers Association 
urged FMCSA to provide the lumber 
and building material industry a short- 
term ELD exception stating that many of 
their members use short-term rentals of 
30 days or less to meet high demand 
periods or instances where vehicles 
have been taken out of operation for 
repairs or service. The American Farm 
Bureau Federation suggested allowing 
drivers hauling live animals and 
agriculture to rest ‘‘at any point during 
their trip without counting this rest time 
against their HOS allotments and 
allowing drivers to complete their trip, 
regardless of HOS requirements, if they 
come within 150 air-miles of their 
delivery point.’’ 
The National Private Truck Council, 
Inc. suggested requiring drivers to 
document their adherence to the 150 
air-mile radius and 14-hour time 
requirements through GPS telematics, 
paper log, timecard notation, or some 
equivalent means. The American Fuel 
and Petrochemical Manufacturers asked 
for additional information from FMCSA 
on the potential impacts of the proposed 
short-haul exception on recordkeeping 
requirements, including the current 8- 
in-30 exception. 
FMCSA Response: The motor carrier 
industry is diverse. As noted above the 
Agency has granted multiple 
exemptions for certain industry 
segments and there are various statutory 
and regulatory exceptions for several 
industry segments. Many of the 
VerDate Sep<11>2014 21:51 May 29, 2020 Jkt 250001 PO 00000 Frm 00018 Fmt 4701 Sfmt 4700 E:\FR\FM\01JNR3.SGM 01JNR3jbell on DSKJLSW7X2PROD with RULES3
--- page 2 ---
33413 Federal Register / Vol. 85, No. 105 / Monday, June 1, 2020 / Rules and Regulations 
commenters cited the exemptions and 
exceptions. While the exemptions 
granted were for certain industry 
segments, the exemptions generally fall 
within the 150 air-mile distance and/or 
14-hour time constraint, such that this 
final rule addresses the issue in general 
terms rather than specific industry 
segments. Also, given that the Agency 
did not propose specific industry carve- 
outs in the NPRM, considering such 
regulatory exemptions is outside of the 
scope of this rulemaking. 
The requirements for applying for an 
exemption are provided in 49 CFR part 
381 subpart C of the FMCSRs. After 
receiving an application for exception 
from the FMCSRs, the Agency will 
publish a notice in the Federal Register 
as required by § 381.315 and request 
public comment on whether the Agency 
should grant the request. FMCSA cannot 
grant an exemption unless it would 
likely achieve a level of safety 
equivalent to that achieved by 
complying with the rule from which an 
exception is sought. 
In recent years, the Agency has 
received numerous requests for 
exemptions related to the short-haul 
provisions; several of these requests for 
exemptions have been granted (available 
at www.fmcsa.dot.gov/exemptions), 
while others have been denied. 
FMCSA did not propose or consider 
new alternative means for motor carriers 
to document short-haul drivers’ hours 
under the revised short-haul exception, 
and is not adding any new 
recordkeeping requirements at this time. 
Furthermore, the changes to the short- 
haul provisions in this final rule in no 
way relieve carriers and drivers of the 
responsibility for complying with the 
current recordkeeping requirements 
found in § 395.1(e)(1)(v), which are 
consistent with 6-month recordkeeping 
requirements for other records. See, e.g., 
§ 395.8(k)(1) (requiring retention of 
RODS and supporting documents for 6 
months); § 395.22(i) (requiring motor 
carriers to retain for 6 months a backup 
copy of ELD records). 
4. Adverse Driving Conditions 
NPRM. The Agency proposed 
allowing drivers encountering adverse 
driving conditions a driving window of 
up to 16 hours (for property carriers) 
within which to complete up to 13 
hours of driving, or a duty period of up 
to 17 hours (for passenger carriers) 
within which to complete up to 12 
hours of driving. 
FMCSA also sought additional 
information and data on the impacts of 
changing the adverse driving conditions 
provision, in part to assess its potential 
costs and benefits. Specifically: 
• Would this change cause drivers to 
travel farther in adverse driving 
conditions? 
• Would this change drivers’ behavior 
when encountering adverse driving 
conditions? How so? 
• Understanding adverse driving 
conditions cannot be predicted, would 
drivers utilize this provision more often 
after this change? 
Additionally, FMCSA requested 
public comment about potential 
modifications to the definition of 
‘‘adverse driving conditions.’’ 
Specifically, the Agency requested input 
on the suggestion that knowledge of the 
existence of adverse driving conditions 
should rest with the driver rather than 
the dispatcher. Alternatively, FMCSA 
asked whether the requirement for lack 
of advance knowledge at the time of 
dispatch should be eliminated, and 
whether the current definition of 
‘‘adverse driving conditions’’ should be 
modified to address other 
circumstances. 
Commenters Supporting an Extended 
Driving Window. The changes proposed 
in the NPRM would apply to drivers of 
both property-carrying CMVs, normally 
subject to a 14-hour driving window, 
and passenger-carrying CMVs, normally 
subject to a driving window of 15 non- 
consecutive hours. 
Numerous commenters, including 
OOIDA, CVSA, the U.S. Chamber of 
Commerce, ABA, IBT, motor carriers, 
industry associations, and individuals 
expressed support for the proposed 
adverse driving conditions provision. 
Many individuals and drivers stated 
that the extension would relieve the 
pressure, stress, and fatigue on drivers. 
Most commenters reasoned that granting 
drivers more flexibility would improve 
road safety. 
Some commenters argued that road 
conditions are not always accurately 
reflected in weather radar maps or other 
technologies, so drivers should have the 
flexibility and discretion to determine 
when it is safe to drive. The California 
Highway Patrol said the provision 
would allow driving at a reduced speed 
or delay operations while in adverse 
driving conditions, which may reduce 
the risk of crashes and improve road 
safety. Keep Truckin, Inc. based its 
support on anonymized and aggregated 
data of daily traffic patterns and speed 
fluctuations in Washington, DC and 
Atlanta, Georgia. An industry 
association said extending the driving 
window for adverse driving conditions 
would greatly benefit the delivery of 
farm supplies. 
While supporting the proposal, 
OOIDA, ABA, and the United 
Motorcoach Association expressed 
concern that the current adverse driving 
condition rules are not enforced 
consistently. The U.S. Chamber of 
Commerce and several industry 
associations said their members rarely 
use the exception, although the 
expansion would be helpful in extreme 
conditions. 
FMCSA Response: FMCSA agrees that 
by adding time to the duty day for this 
exception, drivers may reduce their 
speed or delay operations when they 
experience unanticipated adverse 
driving conditions. 
FMCSA agrees that radar and 
technology may not be entirely accurate 
and thus leaves the driver/dispatcher 
discretion in this final rule. FMCSA is 
not aware of any issues with 
enforcement of or compliance with the 
adverse driving conditions exception. 
Commenters Requesting Additional 
Flexibility for Adverse Driving 
Conditions. Many commenters stated 
that the proposal did not go far enough. 
Among their comments: 
• The provision should include 
unforeseen traffic conditions, such as 
emergency road repairs, congestion, and 
traffic accidents to allow drivers to 
compensate for ever worsening traffic 
congestion and infrastructure problems. 
• Drivers should be allowed to decide 
how to respond to road conditions. 
• The proposed changes to the 
extended driving window were not 
sufficient. 
A few industry associations, motor 
carriers, and individual commenters 
argued that drivers should have more 
discretion over the hours in which they 
drive in potentially adverse driving 
conditions and that this provision did 
not grant enough flexibility to drivers. 
TruckerNation stated that increased 
clarity and supporting guidance is 
needed, asking how a driver would be 
required to document the use of this 
provision on RODS to enable its 
increased and proper use. Many 
industry associations and individuals 
also commented that the current 
definition of ‘‘adverse driving 
conditions’’ should be clarified. Several 
commenters asked that the definition be 
expanded to address detention time or 
concerns specific to various sectors of 
the industry. 
FMCSA Response: This final rule 
modifies the adverse driving condition 
exception to allow extension of the 
driving window by up to 2 hours, 
consistent with the 2-hour extension of 
driving time permitted under the 
current regulations. Though some 
commenters argued for an expansion of 
the current definition of ‘‘adverse 
driving conditions’’ to include 
circumstances such as unforeseen 
VerDate Sep<11>2014 21:51 May 29, 2020 Jkt 250001 PO 00000 Frm 00019 Fmt 4701 Sfmt 4700 E:\FR\FM\01JNR3.SGM 01JNR3jbell on DSKJLSW7X2PROD with RULES3
--- page 3 ---
33414 Federal Register / Vol. 85, No. 105 / Monday, June 1, 2020 / Rules and Regulations 
traffic-related conditions, a close look at 
the definition shows that these road 
conditions are already covered. The 
HOS rules currently define ‘‘adverse 
driving conditions’’ as ‘‘snow, sleet, fog, 
other adverse weather conditions, a 
highway covered with snow or ice, or 
unusual road and traffic conditions, 
none of which were apparent based on 
information known to the person 
dispatching the run at the time it was 
begun.’’ The definition specifically 
refers to ‘‘unusual road and traffic 
conditions’’ which would cover most of 
the concerns mentioned by commenters. 
FMCSA does not believe it is necessary 
to further expound on the traffic 
conditions, as they are generally 
covered. However, the definition is 
modified for clarity and to recognize 
that the adverse driving conditions 
exception might apply based on 
knowledge of a driver (in addition to the 
dispatcher) under certain 
circumstances. 
Commenters Opposed to Additional 
Flexibility for Adverse Driving 
Conditions. Some commenters opposed 
the extension of the driving window. 
They said that: 
• The extension would encourage 
drivers to continue driving when 
conditions are poor. 
• Dispatchers and drivers would 
extend the day without any adverse 
driving conditions or otherwise abuse 
the provision to get around a violation. 
• This provision would cause an 
enforcement problem. 
Several commenters, including IIHS, 
AASM, Senator Murray, and 
Transportation Trades Department, 
AFL–CIO, argued that the proposal 
would worsen driver fatigue. Advocates 
warned that extending the driving 
window enables driving later in the 
duty period, which research has 
associated with increases in crash risk, 
stating that FMCSA provided no 
analysis of that risk. IIHS cited studies 
on the safety and health consequences 
for drivers of disrupted circadian 
rhythms. Congressman DeFazio warned 
that the proposed rule would 
significantly increase on-duty time. 
The Trucking Alliance opposed this 
provision, saying that the definition of 
‘‘adverse driving conditions’’ is unclear, 
allowing drivers to exploit the exception 
and use it to extend their driving 
window every day. Conversely, the 
Kentucky Driver’s Association 
commented that, because the proposed 
rule could be abused to pressure drivers 
to drive beyond the normal 14-hour cap, 
it should be limited to ‘‘verifiable’’ 
events. 
Advocates stated that FMCSA’s 
comparisons of this proposal with duty 
period extensions permitted by the 
Federal Aviation Administration (FAA) 
and the Federal Railroad Administration 
(FRA) ignore the regulatory and 
operational differences among these 
Administrations and do not include any 
of the FAA’s or FRA’s limitations or 
additional requirements, nor has 
FMCSA performed any analysis to 
indicate that such comparisons are 
correct and meaningful. 
FMCSA Response: FMCSA 
acknowledges that the proposal could 
allow drivers who experience adverse 
driving conditions to operate later into 
the duty day. The Agency also 
acknowledges that parallels with the 
airline and railroad industries are not 
exact. However, this change would 
create an incentive for drivers to drive 
more slowly or take a break from driving 
during adverse driving conditions, given 
that, as a result of this change, they will 
have up to 2 additional hours to either 
complete their run or to reach a safe 
location without exceeding the 
maximum daily driving windows. 
Additionally, FMCSA notes that surveys 
by two major trade associations 
demonstrate that the adverse-driving- 
conditions exception is not frequently 
used. Although changes intended to 
clarify the definition and improve 
flexibility may result in an increase in 
the use of the exception, there is little 
reason to expect that either the increase 
in use (or its potential abuse) will be 
significant. 
FMCSA also disagrees that this 
change would increase enforcement 
problems. Drivers relying on the adverse 
driving conditions exception would 
routinely annotate their RODS to avoid 
an HOS violation; consistent with 
current practice, a law enforcement 
officer could investigate the merits of 
the claimed exception. 
Commenters Discussing the Impact on 
VMT. Several commenters, including 
OOIDA and many other industry 
associations, argued that this provision 
would cause drivers to drive more 
safely, not greater distances, in adverse 
driving conditions. Currently drivers 
may drive up to 2 additional hours but 
they may be pressured to complete 
driving within the 14-hour window. The 
expansion of the driving window would 
enable them to drive more cautiously. 
Conversely, AASM argued that the 
provision would cause drivers to drive 
longer distances. They argued that the 
assumption that drivers would reduce 
speed or delay operations during 
adverse driving conditions is not 
supported by scientific study. An 
individual argued that this provision 
will cause drivers to travel farther 
distances. ABA and an industry 
association said that predicting the 
effect of the provision on travel distance 
is impossible. 
FMCSA Response: This rule would 
not allow an increase in driving time, 
but it would increase the driving 
window from 14 to 16 hours when an 
adverse driving condition is 
encountered. FMCSA asked whether the 
extension of the driving window in the 
event of adverse conditions will result 
in an increase VMT. No commenter 
provided responsive data, and none may 
exist. Ultimately, each adverse driving 
condition will create a unique set of 
unpredictable circumstances that 
drivers and motor carriers will react 
to—not plan for. Accordingly, motor 
carriers will not be able to plan for 
additional deliveries, trips, or VMT, and 
the final rule does not quantify the 
impact of these driving changes on 
VMT. The FMCSA believes that any 
increase in VMT will be negligible 
because the total amount of driving time 
remains unchanged by this rule. 
Comments About the Impact of the 
Exception on Driver Behavior. The 
NPRM asked whether the proposed rule 
would change drivers’ behavior upon 
encountering adverse driving 
conditions. Multiple commenters, 
including OOIDA, ABA, IBT, other 
industry associations, and motor 
carriers said the provision would 
improve safety by allowing drivers the 
flexibility to find a safe place to park 
and avoid adverse driving conditions. 
However, the NSC cited research and 
studies arguing that the longer an 
individual is awake, the higher the 
likelihood of safety-critical mistakes. 
Advocates warned that abuse of the 
proposed exception would likely 
increase because carriers could coerce 
drivers to complete trips when 
conditions are adverse or because 
drivers could adjust their evaluation of 
the risk and continue to drive despite 
the opportunity to use the exception to 
stop. Either way, Advocates said 
FMCSA provided no analysis of these 
possibilities and their effect on safety. 
Other commenters, including Western 
States Trucking Association and Sysco 
Corporation, said that the provision will 
not change driver behavior. 
FMCSA Response: FMCSA agrees 
with commenters that it is hard to 
predict, on an aggregate level, what 
behaviors may change. However, trade 
association surveys suggest that this 
exception is not frequently used. 
FMCSA does not believe the level of use 
or abuse will change significantly 
because of this rulemaking. 
Nevertheless, FMCSA agrees with 
commenters that the additional 
flexibility provided by the revised 
VerDate Sep<11>2014 21:51 May 29, 2020 Jkt 250001 PO 00000 Frm 00020 Fmt 4701 Sfmt 4700 E:\FR\FM\01JNR3.SGM 01JNR3jbell on DSKJLSW7X2PROD with RULES3
--- page 4 ---
33415 Federal Register / Vol. 85, No. 105 / Monday, June 1, 2020 / Rules and Regulations 
17 See Interpretations under the HOS rules, 
§ 395.1, https://www.fmcsa.dot.gov/regulations/ 
title49/part/395. 
exception will assist drivers in avoiding 
perilous conditions. FMCSA 
emphasizes that this change will not 
increase the driving time available 
during adverse driving conditions. By 
increasing duty time without increasing 
driving time, this change will provide 
the drivers with more non-driving 
options to safely respond to an adverse 
driving condition. 
FMCSA does not believe that changes 
to the adverse driving conditions 
exception will mean that drivers are 
awake longer. The studies raised by 
commenters did not look at workdays 
with opportunities for rest or sleep in 
them. Additionally, as pointed out by 
OOIDA, ABA, IBT, other industry 
associations, and motor carriers, drivers 
may utilize the additional duty time 
provided by this change to take a break 
from driving that they may not have 
taken otherwise. 
Comments About the Frequency of 
Adverse Conditions. The NPRM asked 
drivers whether they expected to use the 
proposed exception more often. Many 
commenters predicted that drivers 
would use the exception more often, 
especially if the definition were 
clarified. 
The U.S. Chamber of Commerce, 
however, does not anticipate increased 
use because its motor carrier members 
do not regularly use it in the first place. 
Other commenters also stated that 
drivers will not use the provision more 
often. The National Association of Small 
Trucking Companies said that the only 
reason for a change in the frequency of 
use would be if a truck driver began 
working in a new region. A motor 
carrier argued that driver behavior, in 
terms of making the decision whether to 
use the exception or the frequency of 
use often to use the exception, will not 
change because the definition of 
‘‘adverse driving conditions’’ remains 
unchanged. 
FMCSA Response: FMCSA does not 
believe the changes adopted today are 
likely to increase significantly the use of 
the exception, but is unable to estimate 
changes in the frequency on an 
industry-wide level. The change 
provides drivers with a better 
opportunity to use the additional 
driving time already allowed under the 
current rule such that the adverse 
conditions that necessitate driving 
beyond the 14th-hour of the work shift 
may be addressed provided the driver 
can reach an appropriate stopping point 
without exceeding 13 hours of driving 
time. 
Definition of Adverse Driving 
Conditions; Driver and Dispatcher 
Knowledge. The NPRM asked for public 
comment about potential modifications 
or additions to the definition of 
‘‘adverse driving conditions.’’ 
Commenters asked for both a broader 
definition, as well as a more specific 
definition. 
More Detailed Definition. OOIDA, 
TruckerNation, other industry 
associations, and motor carriers said the 
definition should be expanded to 
include all unpredictable conditions 
that a driver may face, such as traffic 
congestion, vehicle accidents, 
construction, or road closures. Multiple 
commenters and drivers said the 
proposal should specifically define 
adverse driving conditions to embrace 
non-weather conditions, including 
Federal and State safety inspections, 
unexpected loading or unloading issues 
at shippers and receivers, and truck 
breakdowns. 
Schneider National Carrier, Inc. 
recommended that the adverse driving 
conditions exception be available to 
drivers only once per week. Schneider 
added that the exception should not be 
allowed to be combined with the use of 
the split sleeper berth option or the 
proposed split-duty provisions. The 
American Moving and Storage 
Association recommended also allowing 
carriers to use the adverse driving 
conditions exception for conditions 
known before dispatch. 
TruckerNation suggested requiring an 
option on an ELD for a driver to upload 
evidence or a detailed annotation to 
establish and document adverse driving 
conditions. 
Road Safe America, the Trucking 
Alliance, ATA, Advocates, a few 
industry associations and motor carriers 
said that the definition should be 
clarified, but not expanded. Advocates 
and Uline believe adverse driving 
conditions should be defined as 
accurately and narrowly as possible, 
and that the situations under which the 
exception may be used should be 
clarified to minimize abuse. ATA 
conducted a survey of its members, 
some of whom said that ‘‘adverse’’ 
should be narrowly defined to include 
only Federal or State declared 
emergencies, while others favored the 
inclusion of all unforeseen road 
conditions. 
Broader Definition. OOIDA 
recommended replacing the term 
‘‘adverse’’ with ‘‘unforeseen’’ to be more 
encompassing. The U.S. Chamber of 
Commerce proposed a definition in 
which ‘‘adverse driving conditions’’ 
would be any conditions which could 
not be predicted at the time of dispatch, 
thereby granting flexibility to both 
drivers and dispatchers. A few industry 
associations recommended that FMCSA 
expand the definition to include 
specific provisions for livestock haulers. 
CVSA recommended making the 
definition like the Canadian federal 
definition. 
Under the current definition, adverse 
driving conditions must not have been 
known to the dispatcher when the run 
began. The Agency asked whether the 
driver’s lack of knowledge should be 
used as a precondition for the 
exception. FMCSA also asked whether 
the requirement for lack of advance 
knowledge at the time of dispatch 
should be eliminated. 
Multiple commenters, including 
OOIDA, ATA, and motor carriers, said 
the driver knows the status of road 
conditions better than a dispatcher 
could, so the driver should be 
responsible for making safety decisions. 
TruckerNation stated that advance 
knowledge should not be a requirement 
and that, as with all safety decisions, 
discretion should be left to the driver. 
ATA acknowledged that dispatchers 
may be aware of adverse driving 
conditions before drivers, so dispatchers 
should continue to notify drivers. 
OOIDA and the Association of 
American Railroads and the American 
Short Line and Regional Railroad 
Association said the requirement for the 
lack of advance knowledge at the time 
of dispatch should be eliminated 
because it prevents drivers from using 
the provision if road conditions change 
after dispatch. 
No Changes. Other commenters, 
including IBT, California Highway 
Patrol, and the Truckload Carriers 
Association, recommended that there be 
no changes to the current definition. 
FMCSA Response: FMCSA declines to 
make the definition applicable to 
specific sectors of the industry or to 
cover situations not contemplated by 
the current definition. The Agency also 
declines to exclude situations currently 
covered. Many of the suggested 
expansions would be covered under a 
reasonable interpretation of the current 
definition; inconsistent interpretations 
might be addressed best by training and 
further outreach efforts. Although the 
Agency does not believe the current 
definition is vague, it nonetheless has 
revised the definition for enhanced 
clarity. 
Agency guidance concerning the 
exception makes clear that it covers 
only situations that occur after a driver 
started her or his trip.
17 This final rule 
does not deviate from that principle. 
The exception does not cover detention 
time, breakdowns, or enforcement 
VerDate Sep<11>2014 21:51 May 29, 2020 Jkt 250001 PO 00000 Frm 00021 Fmt 4701 Sfmt 4700 E:\FR\FM\01JNR3.SGM 01JNR3jbell on DSKJLSW7X2PROD with RULES3
--- page 5 ---
33416 Federal Register / Vol. 85, No. 105 / Monday, June 1, 2020 / Rules and Regulations 
18 ‘‘The Impact of Driving, Non-Driving Work, 
and Rest Breaks on Driving Performance in 
Commercial Motor Vehicle Operations.’’ Blanco, 
2011. Available in the docket for this rulemaking. 
inspections—factors that are to be 
anticipated in the industry. Nor does it 
cover things such as road construction 
or detours except when they could not 
reasonably be known before the driver 
started driving, such as accidents that 
significantly interfere with traffic 
movement. 
The exception is mainly meant to 
cover situations outside a driver or 
motor carrier’s control, and the Agency 
does not expect it to be invoked 
frequently. Thus, the Agency declines to 
limit its use to a fixed frequency or in 
combination with unrelated provisions 
of the HOS regulations or to expand on 
the current industry practice of 
documenting use of the exception on a 
driver’s RODS. 
However, the Agency believes 
clarification is appropriate given the 
common availability and use of 
technology that can provide motor 
carriers and drivers notice of adverse 
weather (and sometimes road) 
conditions. The definition has been 
revised somewhat to recognize that 
drivers on the road can evaluate 
situations that could not be foreseen 
before dispatch or the start of a duty day 
(or after a sleeper berth period). As 
revised, the definition covers conditions 
that are unknown, or could not 
reasonably be known, to the driver 
immediately before the start of the duty 
day or before resuming driving after a 
sleeper berth break, or to the motor 
carrier immediately before dispatching 
the driver. FMCSA believes that this 
change to the definition will lessen the 
need for future regulatory guidance. 
Furthermore, this change will not 
increase available driving time beyond 
what is currently allowed by the 
exception. 
5. 30-Minute Break 
NPRM. FMCSA proposed to require a 
30-minute break if more than 8 
consecutive hours of driving (instead of 
8 hours after coming on-duty) has 
passed without at least one 30-minute 
change in duty status. This would allow 
any 30 minutes of non-driving time to 
qualify as a break, i.e., on-duty (not 
driving) time, off-duty time, or sleeper 
berth time. Many drivers have 
interruptions of their driving time 
during normal business operations, such 
as loading or unloading a truck, 
completing paperwork, or stopping for 
fuel. 
Under the current rules, the break is: 
(1) Required to be off-duty time during 
which no work, including paperwork, 
may be performed, and (2) triggered 
after 8 hours on-duty time, regardless of 
the time spent driving. The flexibility 
provided by the NPRM would have 
allowed these normal breaks from 
driving to count as an interruption of 
the 8 hours of driving status (i.e., ‘‘time 
on task’’ in the research literature), 
provided the break lasts at least 30 
minutes. The proposed changes to the 
30-minute break provision would not 
have allowed an increase in maximum 
driving time during the work shift or 
driving after the 14th hour from the 
beginning of the work shift. 
The NPRM sought information and 
data on the impacts of changing the 30- 
minute break provision, in part to better 
assess its potential costs and benefits. 
Specifically, the Agency asked: 
• Would you take fewer total breaks 
from driving with this change? How 
many and when would those breaks 
have occurred during your route? 
• Do you expect to still take a 30- 
minute break if you have less than 8 
hours of drive time? If so, would you 
take that break on-duty or off-duty? 
• If you no longer need to take a 30- 
minute break, how would you expect to 
spend this additional time? 
• How would this provision change 
your scheduling and planning? 
• Do you expect to drive more miles 
or hours based on this change? Do you 
expect to be able to complete additional 
‘‘runs’’? 
Additionally, the Agency 
acknowledged that many commenters to 
the ANPRM specifically asked that the 
30-minute break requirement be 
eliminated entirely and considered that 
as an alternative under E.O. 12866. 
However, the NPRM said that, without 
the benefit of further information, it 
would not be appropriate to eliminate 
the 30-minute break. Given that the 
flexibility allowed in the proposal 
would alleviate many of the concerns 
expressed by commenters, in the NPRM 
FMCSA sought further information on 
the effect of eliminating the break 
requirement altogether. Specifically: 
(1) What would be the safety impact 
of eliminating the required break, 
potentially allowing up to 11 
consecutive hours of driving? 
(2) What has been the cost to your 
company of complying with the 30- 
minute break rule since the compliance 
date for that rule, July 1, 2013? 
(3) How often do work shifts require 
an individual to drive more than 8 
hours without at least a 30-minute 
change in duty status? 
(4) Would eliminating the break 
requirement result in greater cost 
savings than the current proposal? If so, 
what would be the amount of these cost 
savings? 
Commenters Supporting the Proposed 
Revision. Numerous commenters, 
including individual commenters, 
drivers, and some industry associations, 
supported the proposed changes for a 
variety of reasons, among them: 
• Increased driver control and 
flexibility; 
• Shortened on-duty hours, reducing 
fatigue; 
• Increased control over break-time 
activities (i.e. using the break to load or 
fuel); 
• Simplified implementation; and, 
• Short-haul trip benefits. 
Several commenters said, 
counterintuitively, that the 30-minute 
break made them more tired. The 
implication of such arguments seems to 
be that the focus on driving creates 
tension, which dissipates when drivers 
stop. Having relaxed against their will 
for 30 minutes, drivers may then find it 
difficult to recover their previous 
intensity, which feels to them like 
exhaustion—but does not have that 
effect. Virtually all commenters argued 
that the 30-minute break did not 
improve safety, and some even asserted 
that increases in CMV crashes and 
fatalities in recent years are attributable 
to counter-productive regulations like 
the 30-minute rule. 
ATA described new research that the 
association believed suggested that there 
is additional benefit relative to an on- 
duty break. The Trucking Alliance and 
CVSA also said that a 30-minute on- 
duty break would not decrease safety for 
drivers needing a break. 
The International Food Service 
Distributors Association stated that, in 
some cases, the proposal would allow 
food-service distributors to add 
additional stops to a route, maximizing 
efficiency and reducing traffic. 
FMCSA Response: The Agency agrees 
with the commenters that the 30-minute 
off-duty break generates pressure as 
drivers attempt to keep on schedule. 
Under certain circumstances, it may 
even push them to drive more 
aggressively than they would otherwise 
have done in the latter half of the 14- 
hour driving window, despite the fact 
the total driving time up to that point 
may have been limited by a variety of 
factors. 
Identifying causal connections 
between particular rules and safety 
outcomes is difficult, many factors play 
a role in most crashes, and separating 
their individual contribution is often 
impossible. The best evidence on the 
effect of breaks is provided by the 2011 
Blanco study, discussed in the NPRM 
and elsewhere in this rule.
18 While 
VerDate Sep<11>2014 21:51 May 29, 2020 Jkt 250001 PO 00000 Frm 00022 Fmt 4701 Sfmt 4700 E:\FR\FM\01JNR3.SGM 01JNR3jbell on DSKJLSW7X2PROD with RULES3
--- page 6 ---
33435 Federal Register / Vol. 85, No. 105 / Monday, June 1, 2020 / Rules and Regulations 
57 Intermodal Surface Transportation Efficiency 
Act of 1991, Public Law 102–240, 4002(l), 105 Stat. 
1914, 2144, 1991. 
industry will be essential for an 
effective roll-out, the Agency has also 
developed a plan and corresponding 
materials that will be disseminated now 
that the final rule has been published. 
Comments on Harmonization of U.S. 
and Canada, and Inconsistent State 
HOS Regulations. 
A few commenters suggested 
reviewing and considering other HOS 
regulations, particularly those of Canada 
and Texas. An anonymous commenter 
noted that: ‘‘In Canada, we are allowed 
13 hours of total driving time and 14 
hours of total on-duty time within a 16- 
hour daily clock. Additionally, to reset 
our daily 16-hour clock we only need 8 
hours of continuous off-duty or sleeper 
berth time, however we are required to 
have 10 hours of total off-duty time 
within the daily 24-hour clock. The 
additional two hours of required off- 
duty time can consist of 30-minute 
increments of off-duty periods 
throughout the day.’’ 
In responding to FMCSA’s proposed 
3-hour pause in the duty day, CVSA 
noted that ‘‘the maximum work shift [in 
Canada] for a driver is 16 hours, rather 
than the U.S. 14-hour rule. Therefore, 
CVSA suggests that FMCSA consider 2 
additional hours, as opposed to 3 hours, 
to align with the Canadian HOS 
requirements. The alignment would 
make it easier for the motor carrier 
industry to comply with the HOS 
regulations in both countries, 
streamlining operations for the entire 
transportation supply chain and would 
provide a uniform ELD solution for 
cross-border operations which would 
make it easier for roadside safety 
inspectors to enforce.’’ 
An individual summarized the Texas 
HOS rules as ‘‘No required 30-minute 
breaks. 12-hour drive time 15 hour on- 
duty time. 8-hour sleeper berth or off- 
duty. I believe this will help with 
fatigued drivers and allow drivers to 
drive when they feel comfortable and 
not when the log book says they have 
to go.’’ One commenter who transports 
placardable quantities of hazardous 
materials complained that California 
allows only 10 hours of driving time for 
operations in intrastate commerce. He 
argued that all States should be required 
to adopt Federal HOS limits. ABA also 
commented in support of FMCSA rest 
break standards invalidating all State 
and local standards by field preemption, 
asserting the importance of uniformity 
in the transportation and shipping 
industries. 
Other commenters, including drivers 
and industry associations, suggested 
adopting different HOS rules for major 
sectors of industry, such as team 
operations, oversized freight, and 
agricultural transportation, especially 
livestock. 
Supporters of team operations 
generally favor splitting sleeper berth 
time into two 5-hour segments to allow 
drivers to trade places every few hours 
and keep the CMV moving. Oversized 
and overweight cargo is often 
transported on special vehicles that 
move slowly. The HOS limits can 
therefore create problems for these 
operations. 
Agricultural interests that commented 
on the NPRM emphasized the 
perishability of livestock. The American 
Veterinary Medical Association stressed 
the need to avoid longer transit times, 
especially through mandatory stops 
when animals in crowded trailers can 
experience heat stress. The National 
Pork Producers Council (NPPC) 
generally supported the changes 
proposed in the NPRM, though it 
preferred a 6-hour, rather than a 7-hour, 
sleeper berth period. However, the 
NPPC also argued that the distinction 
between the 14-hour driving window 
and the 11-hour drive-time limit should 
be eliminated. ‘‘Work is work, and if a 
driver can be on-duty then the driver 
should be free to continue driving if 
they feel comfortable.’’ The NPPC 
argued that a 14-hour driving limit is 
consistent with rules in Canada and 
Australia, as well as the intrastate rules 
of California and Texas. 
FMCSA Response: The commenters 
who suggested adopting Canadian HOS 
limits or the Texas rules applicable to 
intrastate commerce offered nothing 
beyond their opinion that these 
regulations are preferable to the Federal 
limits adopted today. 
Motor carrier operations in Canada 
and the U.S. differ in important ways. 
While trip lengths may be comparable, 
traffic density in Canada is much less 
and weather conditions are more 
challenging. Longer Canadian driving 
limits and reduced off-duty times are 
geared to those operating conditions. In 
fact, Canada has special HOS 
regulations for its far northern regions 
that are not applicable to the rest of the 
country. (Similarly, the FMCSA has 
different HOS rules specific to Alaska, 
49 CFR 395.1(h).) The Canadian rules 
appear to be every bit as complex as 
U.S. rules. Adopting some or part of 
them would entail a major re-training 
effort, not only for the clear majority of 
U.S. drivers unfamiliar with Canadian 
rules, but also for the State enforcement 
agencies that would have to revise their 
regulations and databases and then re- 
train all their officers. The CVSA 
suggestion to (partially) harmonize U.S. 
and Canadian rules by adopting a 16- 
hour driving window is not feasible, 
given FMCSA’s decision not to go 
forward with a 3-hour pause in the 
driver’s duty day. The NPRM did not 
propose to adopt any portion of the 
Canadian HOS rules, and the Agency 
therefore cannot do so as part of this 
rulemaking. 
Both the Texas and California 
intrastate HOS rules cited by 
commenters are consistent with the 
variances from the FMCSRs allowed by 
§ 350.341. In implementing the MCSAP 
in the late 1980s, the Federal Highway 
Administration, FMCSA’s predecessor 
agency, allowed State regulations for 
intrastate operations to remain less than 
fully ‘‘compatible’’ with the FMCSRs, 
providing the States were making 
progress toward ‘‘compatibility,’’ i.e., 
national uniformity. However, in 1991 
Congress directed that these ‘‘tolerance 
guidelines’’ with their intrastate 
variances be made permanent.
57 Like 
most States, Texas has availed itself of 
the variances allowed by § 350.341 to 
adopt standards for intrastate commerce 
that are less stringent than the FMCSRs, 
but California’s more stringent driving- 
time limit is also within its authority. 
The NPRM proposed no changes to the 
MCSAP variances and none are adopted 
today. 
The Agency notes that industry 
representatives have occasionally stated 
that they believe the Agency follows a 
‘‘one-size-fits-all’’ regulatory approach, 
even though the FMCSRs make special 
provision for a wide variety of motor 
carrier operations. Some of these 
provisions are based on statute, but 
many were adopted by the Agency to 
accommodate the needs of particular 
segments of the industry. The current 
rulemaking generated additional 
requests for segment-specific HOS rules. 
No such rules were proposed and none 
are adopted today. However, many of 
the requests have been addressed in 
other contexts or by other authorities. 
Oversize and overweight cargo is 
often eligible for special State permits, 
some of which include time limits (e.g., 
no nighttime operations). Although 
parking these combinations may be 
difficult, careful route planning can 
minimize, if not avoid, such problems. 
In any case, FMCSA has no authority to 
address parking shortages, and does not 
believe that extended driving hours are 
a reasonable solution to the problems 
inherent in moving unusual cargo. 
Supporters of team operations often 
argue that drivers should be allowed to 
split their sleeper berth time into 5-hour 
segments, separated by 5-hour driving 
VerDate Sep<11>2014 21:51 May 29, 2020 Jkt 250001 PO 00000 Frm 00041 Fmt 4701 Sfmt 4700 E:\FR\FM\01JNR3.SGM 01JNR3jbell on DSKJLSW7X2PROD with RULES3
--- page 7 ---
33436 Federal Register / Vol. 85, No. 105 / Monday, June 1, 2020 / Rules and Regulations 
58 Sec. 5206(b)(1)(B)–(C), Fixing America’s 
Surface Transportation Act, Public Law 114–94, 129 
Stat. 1312, 1537, Dec. 4, 2015. 
59 Sec. 131 of Title I of Division H of the Further 
Consolidated Appropriations Act, 2020, signed on 
December 20, 2019. 
stints. While such a rule would keep the 
vehicle on the road almost 
continuously, its implications for safety 
are far from ideal. Drivers’ circadian 
rhythms would inevitably be scrambled 
as their 5-hour rest periods rotate 
around the clock. Even if 5-hour rest 
periods were theoretically as restorative 
as the sleeper berth option adopted 
today, obtaining quality rest in a moving 
vehicle is problematic. FMCSA is aware 
of no research demonstrating that 
splitting sleeper berth time into 
continually repeated 5-hour segments 
ensures adequate rest. This final rule 
therefore adopts the sleeper berth 
requirements proposed in the NPRM. 
The transportation of livestock poses 
unique challenges, and consequently 
receives specialized treatment. Congress 
has exempted drivers hauling livestock 
from the required 30-minute break.
58 
Drivers hauling livestock who qualify 
for the statutory ‘‘covered farm vehicle’’ 
exception in § 390.39 are completely 
exempt from the HOS rules and many 
other parts of the FMCSRs. The more 
limited statutory provision for the 
transportation of ‘‘agricultural 
commodities’’ in § 395.1(k)(1) exempts 
drivers from the HOS regulations while 
operating within a 150 air-mile radius of 
the ‘‘source’’ of livestock and other 
commodities. Even if animals are being 
transported a substantial distance, the 
exempt radius gives drivers about a 3- 
hour addition to the normal 11-hour 
driving limit. Finally, Congress has 
prohibited the use of Federal funds to 
enforce the ELD requirements against 
transporters of livestock.
59 The 14-hour 
driving limit proposed by the NPPC is 
far beyond the scope of this rulemaking 
and will not be addressed. In any case, 
longer hours are not the only solution to 
the transportation of animals. For 
example, livestock transporters seem to 
make little use of team drivers to 
address the problems they have 
identified. 
VII. Discussion of the Final Rule 
A. Short-Haul Operations 
In this final rule, FMCSA adopts most 
of the changes proposed in the NPRM, 
including extending the maximum 
allowable workday for short-haul 
property- and passenger-carrying CMV 
drivers from 12 to 14 hours to 
correspond with the 14-hour period 
requirement for property drivers, and 
extending the existing distance 
restriction from 100 air-miles to 150 air- 
miles to be consistent with the distance 
limitation for short-haul drivers that are 
not required to possess a commercial 
driver’s license. 
Drivers and carriers using the short- 
haul exception are not required to use 
a RODS or ELD or take a 30-minute 
break. This extra time in the driving day 
has always been available to drivers, if 
they opted out of the short-haul 
exception. This change allows drivers to 
retain that status while receiving 
regulatory relief. 
B. Adverse Driving Conditions 
FMCSA adopts the proposed changes 
concerning the adverse driving 
exception. A driver who encounters 
adverse driving conditions is allowed 
up to a 16-hour driving window (for 
property carriers) within which to 
complete up to 13 hours of driving, or 
a 17-hour duty period (for passenger 
carriers) within which to complete up to 
12 hours of driving. 
In addition, FMCSA also modifies the 
definition of ‘‘adverse driving 
conditions,’’ to clarify the role of the 
driver in determining when such 
conditions are identified: 
Adverse driving conditions means snow, 
ice, sleet, fog, or other adverse weather 
conditions or unusual road or traffic 
conditions that were not known, or could not 
reasonably be known, to a driver 
immediately prior to beginning the duty day 
or immediately before beginning driving after 
a qualifying rest break or sleeper berth 
period, or to a motor carrier immediately 
prior to dispatching the driver. 
This addition of the driver to the 
definition makes it clear that the driver 
should be involved in the decision- 
making, which should lessen the need 
for regulatory guidance to explain the 
role of the driver in determining when 
the conditions are identified. The 
changes to the other parts of the 
definition, including referring to the 
duty day, qualifying rest breaks, and 
sleeper berth period, simply update the 
definition and reflect the changes and 
updates to the HOS regulations, rather 
than using informal terminology (‘‘the 
run’’). The Agency declines to expand 
the circumstances covered by the 
definition. 
C. 30-Minute Break 
FMCSA adopts the proposed change 
linking the mandatory break to 
cumulative driving time rather than on- 
duty time, and allowing an on-duty-not- 
driving break of at least 30-minutes, to 
satisfy the requirement. 
The Agency notes that many CMV 
drivers interrupt their driving time 
during normal business operations, such 
as loading or unloading a truck, 
completing paperwork, or stopping for 
fuel. Before this final rule, the break was 
required to be off-duty, during which no 
work, including paperwork, could be 
performed and was triggered after 8 
hours, regardless of driving time. 
However, the changes to the 30-minute 
break provision do not increase the 
maximum driving time during the work 
shift or allow driving after the 14th hour 
from the beginning of the work shift. 
The flexibility provided with this 
change will allow normal breaks from 
driving (i.e., from ‘‘time on task’’ in the 
research literature) to satisfy the 
requirement, provided the break lasts at 
least 30 minutes. 
D. Sleeper Berth 
FMCSA adopts the proposal allowing 
a driver additional flexibility in taking 
two off-duty periods under the sleeper 
berth exception. One period must be at 
least 7 consecutive hours spent in the 
sleeper berth, paired with another 
period of at least 2 hours spent either in 
the berth or otherwise off-duty, if the 
two periods total at least 10 hours. 
When paired, neither qualifying period 
counts against the 14-hour driving 
window. (Prior to this final rule, the 
shorter period counted against the 
driving window.) Identical changes are 
made to a parallel provision applicable 
in the State of Alaska found in 
§ 395.1(h). 
E. Compliance Date for the Rulemaking 
FMCSA believe that the flexibility 
provided by these changes will be 
beneficial to the motor carrier industry. 
A short effective date would therefore 
be ideal, however, there are other factors 
to consider. The Congressional Review 
Act (CRA) (5 U.S.C. chapter 8) requires 
a 60 day delay before a major rule, like 
this rule, can take effect. Additionally, 
the need for ELD manufacturers to 
update those systems that exceed the 
minimum requirements, and to train 
drivers and enforcement personnel must 
be considered. 
FMCSA believes that an effective date 
120 days after publication is 
appropriate, given the actions required 
for full implementation. 
F. Appendix B to 49 CFR Part 385 
Based upon this final rule, technical 
changes to the corresponding 
paragraphs listing acute and critical 
violations in 49 CFR part 385, Appendix 
B, VII. List of Acute and Critical 
Regulations are made. 
VIII. International Impacts 
The FMCSRs, and any exceptions to 
the FMCSRs, apply only within the 
VerDate Sep<11>2014 21:51 May 29, 2020 Jkt 250001 PO 00000 Frm 00042 Fmt 4701 Sfmt 4700 E:\FR\FM\01JNR3.SGM 01JNR3jbell on DSKJLSW7X2PROD with RULES3
--- page 8 ---
33437 Federal Register / Vol. 85, No. 105 / Monday, June 1, 2020 / Rules and Regulations 
United States (and, in some cases, 
United States Territories). Motor carriers 
and drivers are subject to the laws and 
regulations of the countries in which 
they operate, unless an international 
agreement states otherwise. Drivers and 
carriers should be aware of the 
regulatory differences among nations in 
which they operate. Canada- and 
Mexico-domiciled drivers must ensure 
compliance with U.S. HOS 
requirements while they are driving in 
the U.S. 
A driver domiciled in the United 
States may comply with the Canadian 
hours of service regulations while 
driving in Canada. Upon re-entering the 
United States, however, the driver is 
subject to all the requirements of Part 
395, including the 11- and 14-hour 
rules, and the 60- or 70-hour rules 
applicable to the previous 7 or 8 
consecutive days. In other words, a 
driver who takes full advantage of 
Canadian requirements may have to 
stop driving for a time immediately after 
returning to the U.S. to restore 
compliance with Part 395. Despite its 
possible effect on decisions a U.S. driver 
must make while in Canada, this 
interpretation does not involve an 
exercise of extraterritorial jurisdiction 
(62 FR 16379, 16424; April 4, 1997). 
IX. Section-by-Section Analysis 
This rulemaking seeks to provide 
additional flexibility under the HOS 
rules in a manner that does not 
compromise safety. Specifically, it (1) 
modifies the definition of ‘‘adverse 
driving conditions’’ and extends a 
driver’s driving window by up to two 
hours should adverse driving conditions 
be encountered; (2) expands the scope 
of the short-haul exception for drivers of 
property-carrying CMVs requiring a CDL 
and for passenger-carrying CMVs; (3) 
modifies the sleeper berth rule; and (4) 
amends the mandatory 30-minute break 
to give drivers subject to the rule less 
restrictive means of satisfying the 
requirement. Additional technical 
changes are made in this final rule. 
Changes to the regulatory text proposed 
in the NPRM are noted below. 
A. Part 385—Safety Fitness Procedures 
In Section VII of appendix B of part 
385, the list of acute and critical 
violations, is modified to match changes 
made in part 395. Specifically, the 
references to § 395.1(h)(1)(i), (ii), (iii), 
and (iv) are modified to reflect the 
redesignations, and text addressing 
§ 395.3(a)(3)(ii) is modified to reflect the 
substantive changes in the 30-minute 
rule. While the changes to this list were 
not included in the NPRM, their 
inclusion on the designation of acute 
and critical violations are distinctly 
technical in nature; they simply update 
the list for purposes of clarity and 
comprehension to reflect regulatory 
changes made elsewhere in the rule. 
B. Part 395—Hours of Service of Drivers 
1. Section 395.1 (Scope of Rules in This 
Part) 
In subparagraph (b)(1), FMCSA 
modifies the exception for drivers of 
property- and passenger-carrying CMVs 
encountering adverse driving 
conditions, allowing them to extend 
their respective driving windows by a 
maximum of 2 hours, consistent with 
the long-standing provision governing 
the extension of driving time. Other 
changes in this subparagraph are merely 
technical or clarifying. 
In subparagraph (e)(1), FMCSA 
modifies the short-haul exception for 
drivers operating either property- 
carrying or passenger-carrying CMVs, 
under which time records can be used 
in lieu of ELDs or RODS, and supporting 
documents need not be submitted to the 
motor carrier. This final rule extends the 
scope of this exception from a 100- to 
a 150-air-mile radius from the driver’s 
normal work reporting location and 
extends the driver’s maximum workday 
from 12 to 14 hours, a period consistent 
with the general rule governing the 
maximum driving window applicable to 
drivers operating property-carrying 
CMVs. All short-haul drivers remain 
subject to the existing limit on hours 
spent driving—11 hours for drivers of 
property-carrying CMVs requiring a CDL 
and 10 hours for drivers of passenger- 
carrying CMVs. Other changes in this 
subparagraph are merely technical or 
clarifying. For example, specific 
references to the 14-hour duty window 
for drivers of ‘‘ready-mixed concrete 
delivery vehicles’’ are eliminated, given 
the expansion of the duty day for all 
short-haul drivers to 14 hours. 
Provisions previously found in 
§ 395.1(e)(1)(iv), duplicating provisions 
limiting drivers’ hours under §§ 395.3 
and 395.5, are eliminated as superfluous 
and to avoid redundancy. 
In subparagraph (g)(1), FMCSA 
modifies the general sleeper berth 
exception for drivers of property- 
carrying CMVs who elect to use this 
exception. Specifically, the Agency 
replaces the requirement for 8 
consecutive hours in the sleeper berth 
and 2 additional hours, either in the 
berth or off-duty, or some combination 
thereof, with a requirement for at least 
7 (but less than 10) consecutive hours in 
the sleeper berth and at least 2 
additional hours, either in the berth or 
off-duty or some combination thereof. 
However, the two periods must total at 
least 10 hours, equivalent to the 10 off- 
duty hours required of drivers who do 
not use sleeper berths. Neither period 
counts against the driver’s 14-hour 
driving window. Other changes are 
clarifying or technical. For example, the 
provision authorizing a team driver to 
count time in the passenger seat while 
the CMV is moving toward his/her 
sleeper berth break is modified to allow 
up to 3 (rather than 2) hours in the 
passenger seat for consistency with the 
minimum hours required in the berth 
under this rule. Long-standing language 
omitted from the NPRM that required a 
driver using the sleeper berth exception 
to calculate available hours from the 
end of the initial break period, is 
restored in this final rule for clarity. 
Provisions previously found in 
paragraphs (g)(1)(i)(B) and (C) are 
eliminated as superfluous because these 
requirements are covered elsewhere in 
part 395. Finally, provisions in former 
§ 395.1(g) specific to drivers of property- 
carrying CMVs operating in Alaska are 
removed and recodified in § 395.1(h)— 
addressing HOS requirements unique to 
that State. 
In paragraph (h), FMCSA revises the 
HOS exception applicable to drivers of 
property-carrying CMVs in the State of 
Alaska. Provisions formerly found in 
§ 395.1(g) specific to Alaska are 
recodified and consolidated in 
paragraphs (h), specifically in (h)(1)(ii) 
and (iii), including provisions 
addressing required off-duty periods 
and sleeper berth provisions. Provisions 
previously found in paragraph (g) that 
are eliminated because they are covered 
elsewhere are added here, given that 
CMV drivers in the State of Alaska are 
not covered by paragraphs § 395.3(a) 
and (b) (property-carrying CMVs) or 
§ 395.5 (passenger-carrying CMVs). 
Although not proposed in the NPRM, 
language is also added to this paragraph 
to address how a driver using the 
sleeper berth exception calculates 
available hours from the end of the 
initial break period, consistent with 
provisions of paragraph (g). The changes 
are either technical or stylistic. For 
example, language proposed in the 
NPRM is modified to more closely track 
language in the current rules, and to 
make clear that, under § 395.1(h), 
neither rest period under the sleeper 
berth provision can exceed 10 hours. 
These changes are made for purposes of 
clarity; except as noted above, changes 
largely reflect language included in the 
NPRM. 
2. Section 395.2 (Definitions) 
FMCSA modifies the definition of 
‘‘adverse driving conditions,’’ 
VerDate Sep<11>2014 21:51 May 29, 2020 Jkt 250001 PO 00000 Frm 00043 Fmt 4701 Sfmt 4700 E:\FR\FM\01JNR3.SGM 01JNR3jbell on DSKJLSW7X2PROD with RULES3
--- page 9 ---
33438 Federal Register / Vol. 85, No. 105 / Monday, June 1, 2020 / Rules and Regulations 
60 In the NPRM, FMCSA posed a series of specific 
questions on the potential modification of the 
definition of ‘‘adverse driving conditions,’’ driven 
in large part by comments the Agency received to 
the ANPRM. Specifically, the Agency requested 
comment on whether the knowledge requirement 
ought to reside with the driver rather than 
dispatcher, whether the lack of knowledge at time 
of dispatch be eliminated, and whether the 
definition ought to encompass additional 
circumstances. See 84 FR at 44200, August 22, 
2019. 
61 Executive Order 12866 of September 30, 1993. 
Regulatory Planning and Review. (58 FR 51735, 
October 4, 1993). 
62 Executive Order 13563 of January 18, 2011. 
Improving Regulation and Regulatory Review. (76 
FR 3821, January 21, 2011). 
63 U.S. DOL, BLS. Employment Projections 
Program. Table 1.2: Employment by detailed 
occupation, 2016 and projected 2026. Available at: 
http://www.bls.gov/emp/ind-occ-matrix/ 
occupation.xlsx, last accessed October 29, 2018. 
eliminating certain language addressing 
conditions already covered, and 
modifying the applicable standard to 
encompass conditions ‘‘not known, or 
[that] could not reasonably be known’’ 
to clarify when the definition applies. 
Furthermore, rather than focus solely on 
the knowledge of the dispatcher, the 
definition is modified to reflect 
knowledge of either the driver or the 
motor carrier at applicable points in 
time.
60 Additional clarifying changes 
were made. For example, the word 
‘‘immediately’’ is added to clarify the 
point in time that the applicable 
conditions must be known and the 
reference to ‘‘unusual road and traffic 
conditions’’ is modified to read 
‘‘unusual road or traffic conditions’’ to 
clarify either scenario would qualify. 
FMCSA also modifies the definition 
of ‘‘on-duty time’’ by updating 
paragraph (4)(iii) of the definition to 
align with § 395.1(g)(1)(i)(D) in this final 
rule. 
3. Section 395.3 (Maximum Driving 
Time for Property-Carrying Vehicles) 
FMCSA revises paragraphs (a)(2) and 
(a)(3)(i) to remove superfluous language 
and make stylistic changes, respectively. 
No substantive change is intended. In 
paragraph (a)(3)(ii), the Agency modifies 
the 30-minute break requirement to 
focus on extended consecutive driving 
periods rather than a driver’s time on- 
duty. Thus, a driver may not drive more 
than 8 hours without an interruption of 
at least 30 consecutive minutes. A 
driver may satisfy the 30-minute period 
by spending the time off-duty, on-duty 
(not driving), or in the sleeper berth, or 
any combination of these non-driving 
statuses. The specific reference to time 
in the sleeper berth is added for clarity. 
As before, drivers operating under the 
short-haul exception (§ 395.1(e)) are not 
subject to the 30-minute break 
requirement. 
The Agency is not adopting the 
NPRM’s proposal to extend the driver’s 
14-hour duty period by taking an off- 
duty break ranging from 30 minutes to 
3 hours. 
X. Regulatory Analyses 
A. E.O. 12866 (Regulatory Planning and 
Review and DOT Regulatory Policies 
and Procedures as Supplemented by 
E.O. 13563), and DOT Regulatory 
Policies and Procedures 
The Office of Information and 
Regulatory Affairs has determined that 
this rulemaking is an economically 
significant regulatory action under E.O. 
12866
61 Regulatory Planning and 
Review, as supplemented by E.O. 
13563.
62 It also is significant under DOT 
regulations because the economic costs 
and benefits of the rule exceed the $100 
million annual threshold and because of 
the substantial Congressional and public 
interest concerning the HOS 
requirements (84 FR 71714, Dec. 27, 
2019). 
An RIA is available in the docket. 
That document: 
• Identifies the problem targeted by 
this rulemaking, including a statement 
of the need for the action; 
• Defines the scope and parameters of 
the analysis; 
• Defines the baseline; and, 
• Defines and evaluates the costs and 
benefits of the action. 
The RIA is the synthesis of research 
conducted specific to current HOS 
practices, stakeholder comments, and 
analysis of the impacts resulting from 
changes to the HOS provisions in this 
final rule. 
Affected Entities 
The changes in this final rule will 
affect CMV drivers, motor carriers, and, 
except as otherwise exempt under 
§ 390.3T(f)(2). The HOS regulations 
apply to CMV drivers. FMCSA obtained 
driver count information, by carrier 
operation, from the Motor Carrier 
Management Information System 
(MCMIS), which includes information 
submitted to FMCSA by motor carriers 
the first time the carrier applies for a 
DOT number, and biennially thereafter. 
Table 3 displays the 2018 estimate of 
CMV drivers from MCMIS. With the 
current baseline annual number of 
6,520,268 CMV drivers (478,184 
passenger carrier CMV drivers and 
6,042,084 property carrier CMV drivers), 
FMCSA then estimated the future 
baseline number of CMV drivers who 
will be affected by this final rule 
annually during the analysis period of 
2020 to 2029. These future baseline 
projections were developed by 
increasing the current baseline 2018 
values consistent with occupation- 
specific employment growth projections 
obtained from the Bureau of Labor 
Statistics (BLS) Employment Projections 
program.
63 The BLS employment 
projections for the following standard 
occupational classifications were used: 
BLS SOC 53–3021 (Bus drivers, transit and 
intercity) 
BLS SOC 53–3022 (Bus drivers, school or 
special client) 
BLS SOC 53–3032 (Heavy and tractor-trailer 
truck drivers) 
BLS SOC 53–3023 (Light truck or delivery 
service drivers) 
The occupational categories noted 
above do not overlap exactly with the 
entire population of CMV drivers who 
will be subject to this rule, primarily 
because there are some CMV drivers 
who operate vehicles over 10,001 
pounds but do not specifically declare 
their occupation as being a bus or truck 
driver. However, as noted above, this 
does not mean that those drivers are not 
reflected in the baseline 2018 estimates 
of CMV drivers produced above. All 
CMV drivers, regardless of their 
occupational category, are included in 
the estimates. The occupational 
categories above represent 
approximately 3.6 million employees in 
2018, and combined are used to forecast 
the future growth from 2018 through 
2029 based on the BLS estimates of 
employees in those industries from 2018 
through 2028. 
BLS provides baseline 2018 values for 
the total number of employees in all of 
the occupational categories noted, as 
well as estimates for 2028. An annual 
compound growth rate for net overall 
growth in the total population of CMV 
bus drivers and CMV truck drivers was 
calculated from the growth in the 
number of employees in these 
occupations from 2018 to 2028 as 
projected by BLS. The projected net 
growth in total employment for BLS 
SOC 53–3021 (Bus drivers, transit and 
intercity) from 2018 to 2028 is 6.1 
percent, which equates to a 0.598 
percent annual compound growth rate. 
The projected net growth in total 
employment for BLS SOC 53–3022 (Bus 
drivers, school or special client) from 
2018 to 2028 is 4.3 percent, which 
equates to a 0.426 percent annual 
compound growth rate. FMCSA then 
computed a weighted average annual 
compound bus driver growth rate of 
0.472 percent for these two occupational 
categories. The projected net growth in 
VerDate Sep<11>2014 21:51 May 29, 2020 Jkt 250001 PO 00000 Frm 00044 Fmt 4701 Sfmt 4700 E:\FR\FM\01JNR3.SGM 01JNR3jbell on DSKJLSW7X2PROD with RULES3