
FMCSA Regulatory Guidance on the Hours of Service Rules
=======================================================


77 FR 33331 - Regulatory Guidance on the Applicability of Property-Carrier Hours-of-Service Rules to the Driveaway Operation of Vehicles Designed to Transport Passengers
-------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------

Source: https://www.federalregister.gov/documents/2012/06/06/2012-13657/regulatory-guidance-
on-the-applicability-of-property-carrier-hours-of-service-rules-to-the-driveaway

Federal Motor Carrier Safety Administration (FMCSA), DOT.

The property-carrier hours-of-service (HOS) rules in 49 CFR 395.3 are applicable to drivers
operating commercial motor vehicles designed or used to transport passengers on "driveaway-
towaway" trips, as defined in 49 CFR 390.5 . This notice provides Federal and State
enforcement personnel, and the motor carrier industry, with uniform guidance concerning
these rules.

Effective Date: This regulatory guidance is effective June 6, 2012.

Thomas L. Yager, Chief, Driver and Carrier Operations Division, Federal Motor Carrier Safety
Administration, 1200 New Jersey Ave. SE., Washington, DC 20590. Email: MCPSD@dot.gov . Phone
(202) 366-4325.

The Motor Carrier Act of 1935 provides that "The Secretary of Transportation may prescribe
requirements for (1) qualifications and maximum hours of service of employees of, and safety
of operation and equipment of, a motor carrier; and (2) qualifications and maximum hours of
service of employees of, and standards for equipment of, a motor private carrier, when
needed to promote safety of operation" [ 49 U.S.C. 31502(b) ].

The Motor Carrier Safety Act of 1984 (MCSA) confers on the Secretary the authority to
regulate drivers, motor carriers, and vehicle equipment. It requires the Secretary to
prescribe safety standards for commercial motor vehicles (CMVs). At a minimum, the
regulations must ensure that (1) CMVs are maintained, equipped, loaded, and operated safely;
(2) the responsibilities imposed on operators of CMVs do not impair their ability to operate
the vehicles safely; (3) the physical condition of operators of CMVs is adequate to enable
them to operate the vehicles safely; and (4) the operation of CMVs does not have a
deleterious effect on the physical condition of the operator [ 49 U.S.C. 31136(a) ]. The Act
also grants the Secretary broad power to "prescribe recordkeeping and reporting
requirements" and to "perform other acts the Secretary considers appropriate" [ 49 U.S.C.
31133(a)(8) and (10) ].

The Administrator of FMCSA has been delegated authority to carry out the functions vested in
the Secretary by the Motor Carrier Act of 1935 [ 49 CFR 1.73(l) ], and the MCSA
[§&thinsp;1.73(g)]. The provisions affected by this Notice of Regulatory Guidance are based
on these statutes.

This document adds regulatory guidance on the applicability of the hours-of-service (HOS)
regulations for property-carrying drivers in 49 CFR 395.3 to drivers of vehicles designed or
used to transport passengers, while operating the vehicle on a "driveaway-towaway" trip as
defined 49 CFR 390.5 . These drivers often work for motor carriers that specialize in
delivery of commercial motor vehicles (CMVs), and they do not operate CMVs to transport
passengers on a regular basis.

The §&thinsp;390.5 definition of "driveaway-towaway" is "* * * an operation in which an
empty or unladen motor vehicle with one or more sets of wheels on the surface of the roadway
is being transported: (1) Between vehicle manufacturer's facilities; (2) between a vehicle
manufacturer and a dealership or purchaser; (3) between a dealership, or other entity
selling or leasing the vehicle, and a purchaser or lessee; (4) to a motor carrier's terminal
or repair facility for the repair of disabling damage (as defined in §&thinsp;390.5)
following a crash; (5) to a motor carrier's terminal or repair facility for repairs
associated with the failure of a vehicle component or system; or (6) by means of a saddle-
mount or tow-bar."

Section 395.3 prescribes the primary HOS regulations applicable to property-carrying
drivers, and §&thinsp;395.5 prescribes the comparable regulations for passenger-carrying
drivers. Neither the term "property-carrying" nor "passenger-carrying" is defined in these
regulations. The FMCSA has received inquiries from motor carriers as to whether the
property-carrying or passenger-carrying HOS rules would apply in driveaway situations
usually involving the delivery of a bus, motorcoach, or similar CMV from the manufacturer or
distributor to the dealer, or similar scenario. The Agency agrees that regulatory guidance
is needed to clarify applicability of the HOS regulations. For the reasons explained above,
FMCSA issues Regulatory Guidance Question 1 to §&thinsp;395.5 of the FMCSRs.

"Maximum driving time for passenger-carrying vehicles."

" Question 1: Would a driver delivering an empty commercial motor vehicle designed or used
to carry passengers, from the manufacturer or distributor to a dealer, or otherwise engaged
in a "driveaway-towaway" trip as defined in §&thinsp;390.5, be required to comply with the
hours-of-service regulations for passenger-carrying drivers?

No. The property-carrier hours-of-service rules in §&thinsp;395.3 are applicable to drivers
operating commercial motor vehicles designed or used to transport passengers in a
"driveaway-towaway" operation, as defined in §&thinsp;390.5."


----------------------------------------------------------------------


78 FR 76757 - Regulatory Guidance on Hours of Service of Drivers Rest Break Requirement; Drivers Who Become Ineligible for the “Short-Haul” Exception During the Duty Day
-------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------

Source: https://www.federalregister.gov/documents/2013/12/19/2013-30205/regulatory-guidance-
on-hours-of-service-of-drivers-rest-break-requirement-drivers-who-become

Federal Motor Carrier Safety Administration (FMCSA), DOT.

This regulatory guidance addresses application of the 30-minute break rule to interstate
drivers of commercial motor vehicles (CMVs) who begin their duty days as "short haul"
drivers exempt from the break rule, but who occasionally exceed the short haul distance or
time limits. Such drivers are then subject to the break requirement and must prepare a
record-of-duty-status (RODS) for the day. The intent of the break rule would be satisfied if
drivers in these situations take a break at the earliest safe opportunity after exceeding
the short haul limits and explain in a RODS annotation why the rest break was not taken
within the required 8 hours of the last off-duty break of at least 30 minutes.

Effective Date: This regulatory guidance is effective December 19, 2013.

Thomas L. Yager, Chief, Driver and Carrier Operations Division, Federal Motor Carrier Safety
Administration, 1200 New Jersey Ave. SE., Washington, DC 20590. Email: MCPSD@dot.gov . Phone
(202) 366-4325.

The Motor Carrier Act of 1935 provides that "The Secretary of Transportation may prescribe
requirements for (1) qualifications and maximum hours of service of employees of, and safety
of operation and equipment of, a motor carrier; and (2) qualifications and maximum hours of
service of employees of, and standards for equipment of, a motor private carrier, when
needed to promote safety of operation" [ 49 U.S.C. 31502(b) ]. This guidance is based on the
Secretary's authority to regulate maximum hours of service.

The Motor Carrier Safety Act of 1984 (MCSA) requires the Secretary to prescribe safety
standards for CMVs. At a minimum, the regulations must ensure that (1) CMVs are maintained,
equipped, loaded, and operated safely; (2) the responsibilities imposed on operators of CMVs
do not impair their ability to operate the vehicles safely; (3) the physical condition of
operators of CMVs is adequate to enable them to operate the vehicles safely; and (4) the
operation of CMVs does not have a deleterious effect on the physical condition of the
operator [ 49 U.S.C. 31136(a)(1)-(4) ]. Section 32911 of the Moving Ahead for Progress in
the 21st Century Act (MAP-21) [ Pub. L. 112-141 , 126 Stat. 405, 818, July 6, 2012] enacted
a fifth requirement, i.e., that the regulations ensure that (5) an operator of a CMV is not
coerced by a motor carrier, shipper, receiver, or transportation intermediary to operate a
CMV in violation of a regulation promulgated under §&thinsp;31136, Chapter 51
[Transportation of Hazardous Material], or chapter 313 [Commercial Vehicle Operators]. This
guidance clarifies the applicability of a portion of the hours-of-service (HOS) regulations
based on authority of §&thinsp;31136(a)(1), (2) and (4); it is unrelated to
§&thinsp;31136(a)(5) and only peripherally related to §&thinsp;31136(a)(3).

The MCSA also gives the Secretary broad power to "prescribe recordkeeping and reporting
requirements" and to "perform other acts the Secretary considers appropriate" [ 49 U.S.C.
31133(a)(8) and (10) ]. Clarification of the regulations is an "appropriate" act. The
functions vested in the Secretary by the Motor Carrier Act of 1935 and the MCSA have been
delegated to the FMCSA Administrator by 49 CFR 1.87(i) and (f) , respectively.

On December 27, 2011 ( 76 FR 81133 ), FMCSA published a final rule amending its HOS
regulations for drivers of property-carrying commercial motor vehicles (CMVs). The final
rule adopted several changes to the HOS regulations, including a new provision requiring
drivers to take a rest break during the work day under certain circumstances. Drivers may
drive a CMV only if 8 hours or less have passed since the end of the driver's last off-duty
or sleeper-berth period of at least 30 minutes. FMCSA did not specify when drivers must take
the 30-minute break, but the rule requires that they wait no longer than 8 hours after the
last off-duty or sleeper-berth period of that length or longer to take the break. Drivers
who already take shorter breaks during the work day could comply with the rule by taking one
of the shorter breaks and extending it to 30 minutes. The new requirement took effect on
July 1, 2013.

On August 2, 2013, the U.S. Court of Appeals for the District of Columbia Circuit issued its
opinion on petitions for review of the 2011 HOS rule filed by the American Trucking
Associations, Public Citizen, and others [ American Trucking Associations, Inc., v. Federal
Motor Carrier Safety Administration, No. 12-1092 (D.C. Cir. Aug. 2, 2013)]. The Court upheld
the 2011 HOS regulations in all respects except for the 30-minute break provision as it
applies to short haul drivers. By guidance effective August 2, 2013, FMCSA has declared that
it would no longer enforce the break rule against any driver that qualifies for either of
the "short-haul operation" exceptions in 49 CFR 395.1(e)(1) or (2) [ See
www.fmcsa.dot.gov/&#8203;documents/&#8203;HOS/&#8203;30-minute-guidance.pdf ]. Section
395.1(e) defines two categories of drivers who qualify as being engaged in short-haul
operations: the "100 air-mile radius driver" and "operators of property-carrying CMVs not
requiring a commercial driver's license (CDL)." To qualify for the exception, the 100 air-
mile radius driver must remain within a 100 air-mile radius of the normal work reporting
location, return to that location at the end of the duty day, and be released from duty
within 12 consecutive hours of the beginning of the duty day. The operator of a property-
carrying CMV not requiring a CDL must remain within a 150 air-mile radius of the normal work
reporting location and must return to that location at the end of the duty day.

Drivers meeting the requirements to qualify for the short haul exception in
§&thinsp;395.1(e) are not required to maintain the standard RODS ("logbooks") described in
§&thinsp;395.8.

Occasionally, a CMV driver will begin the duty day fully expecting to meet all the
requirements of "short-haul operations" as defined by §&thinsp;395.1(e). Nevertheless,
circumstances beyond the driver's control may arise and result in operations that do not
meet those requirements. For example, a driver engaged in short-haul operations would no
longer qualify for that exception if he or she is unable to remain within the required
radius of operation (100 or 150 air-miles), or, in the case of the 100 air-mile radius
driver, when a CMV driver cannot complete the duty day within 12 hours of its start.

When the driver first learns of the changes to his or her itinerary and subsequent
ineligibility for the short-haul exemption, the driver may have already missed the first
mandatory rest break of the break rule; i.e., more than 8 hours may have elapsed since the
driver was last off duty, or in the sleeper

( printed page 76758) berth, for at least 30 minutes. To address this issue, FMCSA advises
that in such situations, the driver should not be considered to be in violation of the break
rule. The driver should annotate the RODS to indicate why the required rest break was not
taken earlier, and should take the break at the earliest safe opportunity. Ideally, this
would be prior to preparing the RODS or immediately following the preparation of the RODS.
Under FMCSA's existing HOS requirements and guidance, drivers would begin preparing the RODS
as soon as they determine they are no longer eligible for the RODS exemption.

For the reasons explained above, FMCSA issues Regulatory Guidance Question 33 to
§&thinsp;395.1 of the FMCSRs:

Question 33. If a driver using either short-haul exception in §&thinsp;395.1(e) finds it
necessary to exceed the exception limitations for unforeseen reasons, is the driver in
violation of the §&thinsp;395.3 rest break provision if more than 8 hours have passed
without having taken the required rest break?

Guidance. No. A driver using a §&thinsp;395.1(e) short-haul exception who finds it necessary
to exceed the exception limitations for unforeseen reasons, is not in violation of the
§&thinsp;395.3 rest-break requirements if 8 or more hours have passed at the time the driver
becomes aware of the inability to use the short-haul exception. The driver should annotate
the record-of-duty-status to indicate why the required rest break was not taken earlier, and
should take the break at the earliest safe opportunity.


----------------------------------------------------------------------


83 FR 26377 - Hours of Service of Drivers of Commercial Motor Vehicles: Regulatory Guidance Concerning the Use of a Commercial Motor Vehicle for Personal Conveyance
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------

Source: https://www.federalregister.gov/documents/2018/06/07/2018-12256/hours-of-service-of-
drivers-of-commercial-motor-vehicles-regulatory-guidance-concerning-the-use-of-a

Federal Motor Carrier Safety Administration (FMCSA), DOT.

On December 19, 2017, FMCSA proposed revisions to the regulatory guidance concerning driving
a commercial motor vehicle (CMV) for personal use while off-duty, referred to as "personal
conveyance." Over 380 comments were received in response to the draft guidance. This
document provides revised guidance and addresses issues raised by commenters. This guidance
applies to all CMV drivers required to record their hours of service (HOS) who are permitted
by their carrier to use the vehicle for personal use.

This guidance is applicable on June 7, 2018 and expires June 7, 2023.

For information concerning this notice contact Ms. LaTonya Mimms, Transportation Specialist,
Enforcement Division, FMCSA. Ms. Mimms may be reached at 202-366-0991 and by email at
LaTonya.Mimms@dot.gov . If you have questions on viewing or submitting material to the
docket, contact Docket Services, telephone (202) 366-9826.

The Federal Motor Carrier Safety Regulations (FMCSRs) require drivers to document their HOS
on records of duty status (RODS), identifying one of four duty status options: (1) On-duty
not driving, (2) driving, (3) sleeper berth, and (4) off-duty ( 49 CFR 395.8 ). The use of
personal conveyance is a tool used to account for the movement of a CMV while the driver is
off-duty.

Motor carriers are responsible for ensuring that drivers are not operating while ill or
fatigued. However, motor carriers, at their discretion, may authorize their drivers to use a
CMV while off-duty for personal conveyance. When this occurs, drivers are required to
document such use as off-duty on their RODS, irrespective of the method used to record the
driver's HOS ( e.g., paper logs, automatic on-board recording device, electronic logging
devices (ELDs), etc.)

The minimum performance and design standards for ELDs in the Agency's final rule on
"Implementation of Electronic Logging Devices and Hours of Service Supporting Documents"
(ELD rule) ( 80 FR 78292 , December 15, 2015) include the automatic recording of data
related to the off-duty movement and location of the CMV. As part of the ELD rule, ELD
manufacturers are required to include a special driving category for personal conveyance.
This may be used by drivers at the motor carriers' discretion.

The previous guidance on personal conveyance ( 49 CFR 395.8 , Question 26) was issued by the
Federal Highway Administration (FHWA), FMCSA's predecessor agency, in a memorandum dated
November 18, 1996, and later published in a compilation of guidance ( 62 FR 16370 , 16426 ,
April 4, 1997). The guidance reiterated the basic principle that a driver in off-duty status
must be relieved from work and all responsibility for performing work. It highlighted the
use of the CMV as a personal conveyance in traveling to and from the place of employment (
e.g., the normal work reporting location). The 1997 guidance included discussion of CMVs
used to travel short distances from a driver's en route lodgings to restaurants in the
vicinity of such lodgings. In addition, the 1997 guidance explicitly excluded the use of
laden vehicles as personal conveyance and the operation of the CMV as personal conveyance by
drivers who have been placed out of service for HOS violations. The guidance has remained
unchanged since 1997.

On December 19, 2017. FMCSA issued revised guidance and requested comments. ( 82 FR 60269 )
In changing the guidance, the Agency focused on the reason the driver is operating a CMV
while off-duty, without regard to whether the CMV is laden.

This notice clarifies issues raised such as using personal conveyance to leave a shipper or
receiver and travel to a safe location for rest, the fact that the use of personal
conveyance does not impact on-duty time, and provides additional scenarios in the guidance
as to when the use of personal conveyance is allowable, and, includes passenger carrier
specific scenarios.

FMCSA received over 380 comments on the proposed guidance. Over 300 of the comments were
from individuals, with approximately 240 representing drivers of property-carrying CMVs. The
remaining comments came from companies, associations, safety organizations, and two States.
Companies included Cowboy Up Transport, Boyle Transportation, Crete Carrier, C.H. Robinson,
and Schneider National. The associations included the American Bus Association, the American
Trucking Associations, the Owner Operator Independent Drivers Association, the Truckload
Carriers Association, and Western States Trucking Association. The safety organizations
included the Commercial Vehicle Safety Alliance, Advocates for Highway and Auto Safety
(AHAS), the Truck Safety Coalition and Road Safe America.

The majority of commenters supported expanding the definition to include laden vehicles.
However, the Truck Safety Coalition and Road Safe America opposed this change, expressing
concern that FMCSA was proposing to replace an objective standard with a subjective standard
and that it would be difficult for law enforcement to assess a driver's intent to determine
if the CMV is being used for personal conveyance. In addition, the Truck Safety Coalition
and Road Safe America noted studies conducted by the FMCSA, National Institute of
Occupational Safety and Health, Federal Highway Administration and National Highway Traffic
Safety Administration, relating to the incidence of fatigue reported by long haul truck
drivers and impact of pressures from the shipping community on fatigue.

AHAS also opposed this change for similar reasons and questioned the disparate impact on
drivers of single unit trucks that FMCSA noted in the December 2017 notice.

Also, several motor carriers reiterated that the decision to allow the use of personal
conveyance should remain with the company.

The purpose of the guidance is to provide additional clarity on the use of personal
conveyance as a type of off-duty status. The guidance provides additional details to
determine if a movement of the CMV is an appropriate off-duty use. The new guidance will
improve uniformity for the industry and the enforcement communities. The clarity provided in
this notice will lead to greater uniformity in the enforcement of the HOS rules.

In response to concerns that this guidance will somehow increase fatigue, FMCSA notes that
there are no changes to the HOS rules in this document. In fact, because the current
requirement to record HOS using ELDs makes the time spent driving a CMV as personal
conveyance transparent to the motor carrier and enforcement, the Agency believes that
consistency and uniformity in the application of the guidance by both the industry and
enforcement will be increased. FMCSA recognizes that much of the pressure on drivers
referenced in the comments results from delays during the loading or unloading process
causing a driver to run out of hours. This guidance will have a positive impact on the
concerns expressed by the Truck Safety Coalition, Road Safe America, and AHAS by giving
drivers the flexibility to locate and obtain adequate rest as this would be off-duty time in
personal conveyance status. In addition, as described above, this guidance, used in
conjunction with the ELD rule will lead to greater uniformity in enforcement.

According to the FMCSA's records in the Motor Carrier Management Information System, there
are approximately 2.3 million straight trucks that operate in interstate commerce. Under the
previous guidance, the drivers of many straight trucks were not permitted to operate in an
off-duty status for personal conveyance because they were laden. The revised guidance allows
these vehicles, under the circumstances described in the guidance to be driven as a personal
conveyance.

Other recurring issues or questions raised are discussed individually below.

Some commenters provided suggestions or requests that are outside of the scope of guidance.
Those included modifying the HOS regulations so that there is a definition of personal
conveyance consistent with the Canadian HOS regulation and establishing mileage or time
limits for the use of personal conveyance.

In addition, some motor carriers and drivers questioned who would be liable in a crash when
the driver is operating in the personal conveyance mode. FMCSA notes that this issue is
outside of its authority and would be determined based on the contract or agreement between
the motor carrier or owner of the commercial motor vehicle and the liability insurance
provider as well as principles of State tort law.

Numerous commenters asked for clarification on how the use of personal conveyance impacts
on-duty hours.

Personal conveyance is an off-duty status. Therefore, there are no impacts to the 11- or
14-hour limitations for truck drivers, the 10- or 15-hour limitations for bus drivers, the
60/70-hour limitations, the 34-hour restart provisions, or any other on-duty status.

Leaving a Shipper or Receiver to go to a Safe Place for Required Rest

Crete Carrier, Vilma Kuprescenko, Desiree Wood, Paul Tyler and many others suggested that a
driver should be allowed to identify movement from a receiver or shipper, after exhausting
his or her HOS, as personal conveyance, if that movement is to allow the driver to arrive at
a safe location to obtain the required rest. Crete Carrier believes that not allowing the
driver to identify such a movement as personal conveyance would be contrary to the coercion
rule ( 49 CFR 390.6 ), as the shipper is forcing a driver to leave the premises even after
exhausting his or her hours of service limits. Schneider National also asked for
clarification on this issue.

The movement from a shipper or receiver to the nearest safe resting area may be identified
as personal conveyance, regardless of whether the driver exhausted his or her HOS, as long
as the CMV is being moved solely to enable the driver to obtain the required rest at a safe
location. The Agency recognizes that the driver may not be aware of the direction of the
next dispatch and that in some instances the nearest safe resting location may be in the
direction of that dispatch. If the driver proceeds to the nearest reasonable and safe
location and takes the required rest, this would qualify as personal conveyance. FMCSA
recommends that the driver annotate on the log if he/she cannot park at the nearest location
and must proceed to another location.

FMCSA also notes that the Coercion Rule is intended to protect drivers from motor carriers,
shippers, receivers, or transportation intermediaries who threaten to withhold work from,
take employment action against, or punish a driver for refusing to operate in violation the
FMCSRs, Hazardous Materials Regulations, and the Federal Motor Carrier Commercial
Regulations. Crete Carrier's reference to the coercion rule in the context of having to
leave a shipper's/receiver's property is not accurate, provided that the shipper or receiver
does not threaten to retaliate or take adverse action against the driver in violation of the
rule.

Jeff Muzik asked about the impacts to the 10-hour break if a safety official requires the
driver to move the CMV.

If a Federal, State or local law enforcement official requires a driver to relocate the CMV
during the 10-hour break period for truck drivers or the 8-hour break period for bus
drivers, personal conveyance may be used to document the movement. Again, as this is off-
duty time, this does not require a restart of the rest period. However, the CMV must be
moved no farther than the nearest reasonable and safe area to complete the rest period.

Schneider National noted that the draft scenarios in section (a) of the guidance to Question
26 implied that the driver must return to the last on-duty location but that other scenarios
in the same section indicate otherwise. Allen England and Billy Barnes Enterprises expressed
disagreement with any requirement to return to the last on-duty location.

The driver is not required to return to the previous on-duty location. A driver may resume
on-duty status immediately after an off-duty status regardless of the location of the CMV.

Danny Schnautz, Brian Ausloos, and Doug Pope questioned FMCSA's description of "enhancing
operational readiness." Other carriers also provided examples of movements that they
believed are personal conveyance but enhance operational readiness.

Enhancing operational readiness includes on-duty movement of a CMV that provides a
commercial benefit to the motor carrier. For example, if the movement places the load closer
to the destination, it may not be considered personal conveyance, except under circumstances
outlined specifically in the examples provided in the guidance. Additionally, if a driver
who is under dispatch stops at a location such as his/her home, because the driver's home is
closer to the next destination or pick up location, then this would not be personal
conveyance.

Application of Guidance to Passenger Carrying Vehicles

The American Bus Association (ABA) stated that the proposed guidance did not mention
motorcoaches. ABA and others requested examples that specifically reference motorcoach
operations. The United Motorcoach Association provided examples of personal conveyance,
including use of a motorcoach to reach restaurants or pursue personal activities after
dropping off passengers at a hotel or when a driver is using a motorcoach to transport
drivers who are off-duty to pursue personal activities.

In addition, Michael Letlow requested confirmation that motorcoaches with luggage only are
not considered laden.

Examples have been added to the final guidance that make clear that drivers of passenger-
carrying operations may also use their vehicles for personal conveyance in appropriate
circumstances. In addition, FMCSA reminds commenters that this guidance now applies
regardless of whether the vehicle is laden. However, the requirement for the driver to be
off-duty still exists. Therefore, if a driver is taking luggage to a hotel and is on-duty,
personal conveyance would not apply. However, if the driver is off-duty and using a
motorcoach with luggage on board to get lunch, personal conveyance would be appropriate.

FMCSA replaces Question 26 as noted below. In accordance with the requirement in Section
5203(a)(2)(A) of the Fixing America's Surface Transportation (FAST) Act, Public Law 114-94 ,
129 Stat. 1312, 1535, Dec. 4, 2015, the guidance above will be posted on FMCSA's website,
http://www.fmcsa.dot.gov and expires no later than June 7, 2023. The Agency will then
consider whether the guidance should be withdrawn, reissued for another period of up to five
years, or incorporated into the safety regulations at that time.

FMCSA reminds motor carriers and drivers that additional information about ELDs is available
at www.fmcsa.dot.gov/&#8203;eld .

FMCSA updates the guidance for §&thinsp;395.8 Driver's Record of Duty Status to read as
follows:

Question 26: Under what circumstances may a driver operate a commercial motor vehicle (CMV)
as a personal conveyance?

Guidance: A driver may record time operating a CMV for personal conveyance ( i.e., for
personal use or reasons) as off-duty only when the driver is relieved from work and all
responsibility for performing work by the motor carrier. The CMV may be used for personal
conveyance even if it is laden, since the load is not being transported for the commercial
benefit of the carrier at that time. Personal conveyance does not reduce a driver's or motor
carrier's responsibility to operate a CMV safely. Motor carriers can establish personal
conveyance limitations either within the scope of, or more restrictive than, this guidance,
such as banning use of a CMV for personal conveyance purposes, imposing a distance
limitation on personal conveyance, or prohibiting personal conveyance while the CMV is
laden.

(a) Examples of appropriate uses of a CMV while off-duty for personal conveyance include,
but are not limited to:

1. Time spent traveling from a driver's en route lodging (such as a motel or truck stop) to
restaurants and entertainment facilities.

2. Commuting between the driver's terminal and his or her residence, between trailer-drop
lots and the driver's residence, and between work sites and his or her residence. In these
scenarios, the commuting distance combined with the release from work and start to work
times must allow the driver enough time to obtain the required restorative rest as to ensure
the driver is not fatigued.

3. Time spent traveling to a nearby, reasonable, safe location to obtain required rest after
loading or unloading. The time driving under personal conveyance must allow the driver
adequate time to obtain the required rest in accordance with minimum off-duty periods under
49 CFR 395.3(a)(1) (property-carrying vehicles) or 395.5(a) (passenger-carrying vehicles)
before returning to on-duty driving, and the resting location must be the first such
location reasonably available.

4. Moving a CMV at the request of a safety official during the driver's off-duty time

5. Time spent traveling in a motorcoach without passengers to en route lodging (such as
motel or truck stop), or to restaurants and entertainment facilities and back to the
lodging. In this scenario, the driver of the motorcoach can claim personal conveyance
provided the driver is off-duty. Other off-duty drivers may be on board the vehicle, and are
not considered passengers.

6. Time spent transporting personal property while off-duty.

7. Authorized use of a CMV to travel home after working at an offsite location.

(b) Examples of uses of a CMV that would not qualify as personal conveyance include, but are
not limited to, the following:

1. The movement of a CMV in order to enhance the operational readiness of a motor carrier.
For example, bypassing available resting locations in order to get closer to the next
loading or unloading point or other scheduled motor carrier destination.

2. After delivering a towed unit, and the towing unit no longer meets the definition of a
CMV, the driver returns to the point of origin under the direction of the motor carrier to
pick up another towed unit.

3. Continuation of a CMV trip in interstate commerce in order to fulfill a business purpose,
including bobtailing or operating with an empty trailer in order to retrieve another load or
repositioning a CMV (tractor or trailer) at the direction of the motor carrier.

4. Time spent driving a passenger-carrying CMV while passenger(s) are on board. Off-duty
drivers are not considered passengers when traveling to a common destination of their own
choice within the scope of this guidance.

5. Time spent transporting a CMV to a facility to have vehicle maintenance performed.

6. After being placed out of service for exceeding the maximum periods permitted under part
395, time spent driving to a location to obtain required rest, unless so directed by an
enforcement officer at the scene.

7. Time spent traveling to a motor carrier's terminal after loading or unloading from a
shipper or a receiver.

8. Time spent operating a motorcoach when luggage is stowed, the passengers have disembarked
and the driver has been directed to deliver the luggage.


----------------------------------------------------------------------


83 FR 26374 - Hours of Service of Drivers of Commercial Motor Vehicles; Regulatory Guidance Concerning the Transportation of Agricultural Commodities
-----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------

Source: https://www.federalregister.gov/documents/2018/06/07/2018-12250/hours-of-service-of-
drivers-of-commercial-motor-vehicles-regulatory-guidance-concerning-the

Federal Motor Carrier Safety Administration (FMCSA), DOT

FMCSA announces regulatory guidance to clarify the applicability of the "Agricultural
commodity" exception in the "Hours of Service (HOS) of Drivers" regulations. This regulatory
guidance clarifies the exception with regard to: drivers operating unladen vehicles
traveling either to pick up an agricultural commodity or returning from a delivery point;
drivers engaged in trips beyond 150 air-miles from the source of the agricultural commodity;
determining the "source" of agricultural commodities under the exemptions; and how the
exception applies when agricultural commodities are loaded at multiple sources during a
trip. This regulatory guidance is issued to ensure consistent understanding and application
of the exception by motor carriers and State officials enforcing HOS rules identical to or
compatible with FMCSA's requirements.

This guidance is applicable on June 7, 2018 and expires June 7, 2023.

Mr. Thomas Yager, Chief, Driver and Carrier Operations Division, Federal Motor Carrier
Safety Administration, U.S. Department of Transportation, 1200 New Jersey Avenue SE,
Washington, DC 20590, phone (202) 366-4325, email MCPSD@dot.gov .

To view comments, as well as documents mentioned in this preamble as being available in the
docket, go to www.regulations.gov and insert the docket number, "FMCSA-2017-0360" in the
"Keyword" box and click "Search." Next, click the "Open Docket Folder" button and choose the
document to review. If you do not have access to the internet, you may view the docket
online by visiting the Docket Management Facility in Room W12-140 on the ground floor of the
DOT West Building, 1200 New Jersey Avenue SE, Washington, DC 20590, between 9 a.m. and 5
p.m., e.t., Monday through Friday, except Federal holidays.

The National Highway System Designation Act of 1995, Public Law 104-59 , sec. 345, 109 Stat.
568. 613 (Nov. 28, 1995) (the Act), provided the initial exception for drivers transporting
agricultural commodities or farm supplies for agricultural purposes. The Act limited the
exception to a 100 air-mile radius from the source of the commodities or distribution point
for the farm supplies and during the planting and harvesting seasons as determined by the
applicable State.

The Safe, Accountable, Flexible, Efficient Transportation Act: A Legacy for Users (SAFETEA-
LU) revised this provision, redesignated it as new section 229 of Title II of the Motor
Carrier Safety Improvement Act of 1999, and defined the terms "agricultural commodity" and
"farm supplies for agricultural purposes." Public Law 109-59 , sections 4115 and 4130, 119
Stat. 1144, 1726, 1743 (Aug. 10, 2005). These terms are now defined in 49 CFR 395.2 .

Most recently, the statute was amended by section 32101(d) of the Moving Ahead for Progress
in the 21st Century Act (MAP-21), Public Law 112-141 , 126 Stat. 405, 778 (July 6, 2012).
This provision revised the description of the exception's scope and extended the applicable
distance from 100 air-miles to 150 air-miles from the source.

The focus of today's guidance is limited to the application of the 150 air-mile exception
for the transportation of "agricultural commodities," 49 CFR 395.1(k)(1) . It does not
address "farm supplies for agricultural purposes"

( printed page 26375) under §&thinsp;395.1(k)(2) or (3), since few questions have been
raised about their applicability, nor does it address the specifics of the definition of an
agricultural commodity as defined in §&thinsp;395.2. While the regulatory provision
governing the agricultural commodity exception closely tracks the statutory provisions
discussed above, the language is susceptible to multiple interpretations, and the Agency
acknowledges that various stakeholders and enforcement officials in different States have
expressed inconsistent understandings of the exception from time to time.

On December 20, 2017, FMCSA published a Federal Register notice proposing regulatory
guidance concerning the transportation of agricultural commodities and requested public
comment on the proposals ( 82 FR 60360 ). The comment period ended on January 19, 2018, but
was extended to February 20, 2018 ( 83 FR 2765 , Jan. 19, 2018). There were 566 comments
submitted to the docket. Approximately one-half of them addressed issues other than this
regulatory guidance, such as electronic logging devices (ELDs), other aspects of the HOS
rules, and other provisions of the Federal Motor Carrier Safety Regulations (FMCSRs). Some
commenters suggested specific revisions to the FMCSRs, which are beyond the scope of
regulatory guidance. Of the remaining comments, most were supportive of the proposed
guidance and suggested only minor revisions. Many were from umbrella agricultural
associations, some representing as many as 15 other associations. Additional details
regarding the public comments are provided under the topical headings below.

Interpreted literally, the agricultural commodity exception could be read as applicable only
during the period during which the commodity is being transported, and not to movements of
an unladen commercial motor vehicle (CMV) either traveling to pick up a load or returning
after a delivery. The Agency does not consider that view consistent with the de-regulatory
purpose of the exception since applying HOS rules on these unladen trips would limit the
relief that Congress intended to grant, while needlessly complicating the regulatory
monitoring task that enforcement officials are asked to perform. It is unreasonable to
assume that the 1995 statute intended to exempt, for example, farmers hauling soy beans from
the field to an elevator, while subjecting them to the full extent of the HOS regulations
during the empty return trip to the field to pick up the next load. The Agency has therefore
informally advised stakeholders that both legs of a trip are covered. In the proposed
guidance (Question 34), FMCSA sought to clarify how the agricultural commodity exception
applies to someone driving an unladen CMV either to a source to pick up an agricultural
commodity or on a return trip following delivery of an agricultural commodity. The proposed
Guidance to Question 34 stated that the agricultural commodity exception
(§&thinsp;395.1(k)(1)) does apply while driving unloaded to a source where an agricultural
commodity will be loaded, and to an unloaded return trip after delivering an agricultural
commodity, provided that the trip does not involve transporting other cargo and the sole
purpose of the trip is to complete the delivery or pick up of of agricultural commodities,
as defined in §&thinsp;395.2.

Comments: All comments on this issue were supportive. The American Farm Bureau Federation
(Farm Bureau) agrees with the Agency's interpretation that unladen vehicles traveling to and
from a source of an agricultural commodity should be able to take advantage of the
agricultural commodity exception. The Oregon Cattleman's Association supports FMCSA's view
that time spent driving an unladen or empty vehicle to or from a source of an agricultural
commodity should be exempt from the hours-of-service (HOS) provisions. The New Mexico Farm
and Livestock Bureau agrees, commenting that unladen vehicles hauling to and from an
agricultural source or multiple sources should fall under the exception. A number of
multiple-group filers commented that the Agency must clearly define that unladen trucks are
covered under the agricultural exception. The Owner-Operator Independent Drivers Association
(OOIDA) supports the revised guidance that would allow the exception for drivers while
driving unloaded to a source where an agricultural commodity will be loaded, and to an
unloaded return trip after delivering an agricultural commodity. The Agricultural and Food
Transporters Conference, an affiliate of the American Trucking Associations (ATA), commented
that the Question 34 guidance is crucial for the movement of agricultural commodities and
farm supplies. When a carrier is delivering an agricultural commodity, it must have the
ability to unload and travel back to reload, all while under the exception. Not only does
this minimize confusion for the carrier in having to travel exempt and non-exempt over and
over, but it also significantly minimizes confusion for enforcement officials who are
working with the carriers.

FMCSA Response: The Agency agrees that the §&thinsp;395.1(k)(1) exception should apply to
all portions of a round-trip involving agricultural commodities that occur within the 150
air-mile radius of the source, regardless of whether the CMV is loaded or empty or whether
the destination is outside the 150 air-mile radius. The Guidance in Question 34 to
§&thinsp;395.1 is revised to this effect.

2. Loads Beyond a 150 Air-Mile Radius (Question 35)

The Agency recognizes that some enforcement personnel and other stakeholders have
interpreted the agricultural commodity exception as inapplicable to any portion of a trip if
the destination exceeds 150 air-miles from the source. Under that reading, the word
"location" in §&thinsp;395.1(k)(1) is interpreted as reflecting only the final destination
of the load. FMCSA considers the statutory language, as amended, [ 1 ] and the implementing
regulation&thinsp; [ 2 ] to be ambiguous, given the legislative intent to create an exempt
zone with a radius of 150 air miles. The Agency believes that a narrow interpretation is
unwarranted. In the proposed regulatory guidance (Question 35), the Agency stated that
"location" means the outer limit of the exception distance, i.e., 150 air-miles from the
source. Thus, the Agency proposed to interpret the exception as available to a driver
transporting agricultural commodities for a distance up to 150 air-miles from the source,
regardless of the distance between the source and final destination or place of delivery.

( printed page 26376) Upon crossing the 150 air-mile point, however, the driver would be
subject to the HOS rules for the remainder of the trip to the destination. The hours
accumulated within the 150-mile radius are not counted toward the driver's hours of service.
Returning empty, the driver would be subject to the HOS rules until returning within the 150
air-mile radius in which the trip began.

Comments: Most commenters supported Question 35 as proposed, and one commenter was
completely opposed. The Farm Bureau requested the Agency to modify Question 35 to simply
state: "The exception applies to transportation during the initial 150-air miles from the
source of the commodity. Starting at zero from that point, the driver must then begin
recording his or her duty time, and the limits under the 11-hour, 14-hour, and 60/70-hour
rules apply." The Florida Fruit and Vegetable Association commented that the agricultural
exception is unclear on how it is to be applied beyond the 150 air-miles, and does not
encompass trucks returning once they have been assigned a specific pick-up. Additionally, it
is not clear how hours would be recorded if multiple pickup points are involved. An
individual commenter stated that the proposed guidance is unreasonable and is likely to
create unsafe conditions where fatigued drivers are operating on the highway. According to
him, the term "location" in the phrase, "from the source of the agricultural commodities to
a location within a 150 air-mile radius from the source," can only mean the delivery
location. He states that under the proposed guidance, if a person is stopped outside the 150
air-mile radius of the source, neither the motor carrier nor an enforcement officer will be
able to determine compliance with the law. If a driver is exempt from part 395 some of the
time, but has to comply with all of part 395 at other times, it would be impossible to
determine compliance with HOS when the driver is not exempt. The National Grain and Feed
Association asked FMCSA to apply the HOS regulations only to situations in which a driver
operates beyond the 150-air mile radius. Therefore, starting at the time and location where
the vehicle goes past the 150-air mile distance, the driver must maintain logs.

FMCSA Response: FMCSA believes it would be contrary to the purpose of the exception to apply
it to only one portion of the trip within the 150 air-mile radius. The Agency disagrees that
it would be impossible to determine HOS compliance outside the 150 air-mile radius.
Transporters are required to maintain records of duty status (paper or AOBRD/ELD) and
supporting documents when not operating under an exception. Commercial vehicle inspectors
are trained to ascertain compliance with the HOS regulations, and would be able to do so as
with any other transporters who are not under an HOS exception at the time of inspection.

Several agricultural transporters have requested guidance on the extent to which grain
elevators or livestock sale barns, for example, should be considered a "source" of
agricultural commodities under §&thinsp;395.1(k)(1). Historically, the nature of the
commodities included in the definition led to an informal conclusion that the "source" was
the location where the crops were grown or the animals raised. That concept does not
adequately address the aggregation and interim storage of commodities. The identification of
the source is more reasonably defined by factors that include more than a farm or ranch.

As long as the commodity retains its original form, a place where the commodity is
aggregated and stored may be treated as a "source" from which the 150 air-mile radius is
measured.

Comments: Those persons who commented on the issue agreed that elevators and livestock
markets are examples of "sources" other than the original farm or field. Many suggested
other broad examples that they believe should be included. No one specifically objected to
the proposal. The Farm Bureau believes that logic and common sense dictate that grain
elevators and livestock markets are "sources" of agricultural commodities. The Oregon
Cattleman's Association agrees with this position, and cites the dictionary definition of
"source" as "a point of origin" and describes the challenges of loading at such locations as
virtually identical to loading at a farm or ranch. Other commenters point out that feed
mills and barns, as well as processing plants that produce bulk animal feed, are often
legitimately viewed as sources. The Midwest Shipper's Association states that grain
elevators are often a source, and that other facilities are closely related to elevators.
These include facilities that clean and process grain, soybeans and oilseed, as well as
ethanol plants that ship distiller grains.

FMCSA Response: While an agricultural commodity may have several "sources" under Question 36
( e.g., for grain, both a field and an elevator), the "source" necessarily excludes the
point at which the commodity is processed to such an extent that it is no longer in its
original form or does not otherwise meet the definition of an agricultural commodity in 49
CFR 395.2 . Question 36 to §&thinsp;395.1 has been added to clarify that the source of an
agricultural commodity includes more than just the original location at the farm or field.
The Agency recognizes that further regulatory guidance may be necessary as the industry and
enforcement communities adjust to these clarifications of §&thinsp;395.1.

Many transporters have also asked how the agricultural commodity exception would apply if
the driver were to pick up partial loads at two or more locations. Specifically, they asked
whether a pick-up at a subsequent source has the effect of extending the 150 air-mile
radius, i.e., restarting the calculation of the 150 air-mile distance. Previous informal
guidance has been that the 150 air-mile radius is based on the first source of an
agricultural commodity on a particular trip, and that additional stops to load additional
agricultural commodities do not extend the 150-mile radius.

Comments: Most commenters agreed that multiple pick-ups and deliveries should be allowed,
but that the 150 air-mile radius should be measured from the last pick-up point, not the
first point as proposed. Other than the disagreement with that part of the proposal, no one
objected to allowing multiple pick-ups and deliveries. The Farm Bureau believes that the
exception should not be limited to one "use" each day, and all locations at which
agricultural commodities are loaded for shipment should qualify as a source. The Oregon
Cattleman's Association agrees, and points out that the alternative&mdash;limiting a vehicle
or driver to a single "trip"&mdash;adds unnecessary complexity to the analysis. Each of
several loading stops during the duty day takes place at what the industry views as a
"source"&mdash;the industry does not think in terms of a single daily "trip." The New Mexico
Farm and Livestock Bureau concurs that livestock markets and elevators are properly viewed
as the source of the commodity. The Colorado Farm Bureau states that Congress did not intend
to limit a driver or vehicle to a single "source" each calendar day. The Iowa Cattlemen's
Association supports the Farm Bureau position.

Commenters explained that drivers often must pick up agricultural commodities at several
locations to fill their vehicle. This is the only reasonable approach to making a living
hauling

( printed page 26377) agricultural products. It would be inefficient to operate below
capacity, and one stop may not have enough product to fill a truck.

CVSA applauded efforts to update Agency guidance. It believes greater clarity is needed
regarding the loading of agricultural commodities at multiple sources. It states that the
exception should begin with the first source, and that stopping after that initial source
should not restart the exception. In its view, the exception and the 150 air-mile radius
should be applied from the original source only.

FMCSA Response: Question 37 to §&thinsp;395.1 has been added to clarify that multiple pick-
ups are permissible but that the 150 air-mile radius continues to be measured from the first
pick-up point regardless of the number of times commodities are loaded or offloaded. The
Agency agrees with CVSA's position that the exception should begin with the first source
only. FMCSA notes in the interest of safety that, under a contrary interpretation that
restarts the 150-mile exception with each new source, a motor carrier could effectively
extend the exception indefinitely. The Agency did not intend to imply that a carrier would
be limited to one "trip" per day. A trip terminates when all of the commodity has been
offloaded or non-exempt freight or products are added to the load. Thereafter, a new trip
under the agricultural exception could be started the same day by loading a shipment of
agricultural commodities at a different source. The 150 air-mile radius would then be
measured from this new trip initiation point.

FMCSA issues Regulatory Guidance, Questions 34, 35, 36, and 37 to 49 CFR 395.1 as follows:

Question 34: Does the agricultural commodity exception (§&thinsp;395.1(k)(1)) apply to
drivers while driving unloaded within 150 air-miles of the place where an agricultural
commodity will be loaded, and to that portion of an unloaded return trip which occurs within
a 150 air-mile radius of the place where the agricultural commodity was loaded?

Guidance: Yes, provided that the trip does not involve transporting any non-agricultural
cargo and the sole purpose of the trip is to make a pick-up or delivery of agricultural
commodities, as defined in §&thinsp;395.2. In that case, driving and on-duty time are not
limited, nor do other requirements of 49 CFR part 395 apply.

Question 35: Does the agricultural commodity exception (§&thinsp;395.1(k)(1)) apply if the
destination for the commodity is beyond the 150 air-mile radius from the source?

Guidance: Yes, the exception applies to transportation during the initial 150 air-miles from
the source of the commodity, regardless of the distance to the final destination. Once a
driver operates beyond the 150 air-mile radius of the source, 49 CFR part 395 applies. The
driver is then subject to the limits under the hours-of-service rules and must record those
hours. Once the hours-of-service rules begin to apply on a given trip, they continue to
apply for the duration of that trip, until the driver crosses back into the area within 150
air-miles of the original source of the commodities.

Question 36: How is the "source" of the agricultural commodities in §&thinsp;395.1(k)(1)
determined?

Guidance: The "source" of an agricultural commodity, as the term is used in
§&thinsp;395.1(k)(1), is the point at which an agricultural commodity is loaded onto an
unladen commercial motor vehicle. The location may be any intermediate storage or handling
location away from the original source at the farm or field, provided the commodity retains
its original form and is not significantly changed by any processing or packing. If a driver
is making multiple trips, the first trip, and the 150 air-mile exception around that source,
terminate once all agricultural products are offloaded at a delivery point. A new source for
a new trip may then be identified, and the 150 air-mile radius for the exception will be
around that source.

For example, a sales barn where cattle are loaded may be treated as a "source," in addition
to the location at which they were raised, since cattle remain livestock. As another
example, a place where heads of lettuce are stored may become a "source," provided they
retain their original form. An elevator where grain is collected and dried may be a new
"source," again assuming that the grain is not milled or similarly processed at the
elevator.

Question 37: How is the "source of the agricultural commodities" determined if the driver
makes multiple pick-ups of the commodity en route to the final destination?

Guidance: When a driver loads some of an agricultural commodity at a "source" and then loads
more of that commodity at additional stops, the first place where the commodity was loaded
is the measuring point for the 150 air-mile radius.

In accordance with section 5203(a)(2)(A) and (a)(3) of the Fixing America's Surface
Transportation (FAST) Act, Public Law 114-94 , 129 Stat. 1312, 1535 (Dec. 4, 2015), this
regulatory guidance will be posted on FMCSA's website, www.fmcsa.dot.gov . It expires June
7, 2023. The Agency will consider whether the guidance should be withdrawn, reissued for
another period up to five years, or incorporated into the safety regulations.

1. &thinsp;As amended by MAP-21, Public Law 112-141 , 32101(d), 126 Stat. 778 (July 6,
2012), this statute reads:

(1) Transportation of agricultural commodities and farm supplies.&mdash;Regulations
prescribed by the Secretary under sections 31136 and 31502 regarding maximum driving and on-
duty time for drivers used by motor carriers shall not apply during planting and harvest
periods, as determined by each State, to&mdash;

(A) Drivers transporting agricultural commodities from the source of the agricultural
commodities to a location within a 150-air-mile radius from the source; . . .

Agricultural operations. The provisions of this part shall not apply during planting and
harvesting periods, as determined by each State, to drivers transporting

(1) Agricultural commodities from the source of the agricultural commodities to a location
within a 150 air-mile radius from the source;

. . . 49 CFR 395.1(k)(1) . The term "agricultural commodity" is defined in 49 CFR 395.2 .


----------------------------------------------------------------------


75 FR 32860 - Regulatory Guidance Concerning the Preparation of Drivers' Record of Duty Status To Document Compliance With the Hours-of-Service Requirements
------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------

Source: https://www.federalregister.gov/documents/2010/06/10/2010-13900/regulatory-guidance-
concerning-the-preparation-of-drivers-record-of-duty-status-to-document

Federal Motor Carrier Safety Administration (FMCSA), DOT.

The FMCSA announces regulatory guidance concerning the requirement for interstate commercial
motor vehicle (CMV) drivers to prepare, in duplicate, a record of duty status for each
24-hour period. FMCSA has determined that the current requirement may be satisfied through
the preparation of an original handwritten record, and subsequent electronic submission to
the motor carrier of a scanned image of the original record; the driver would retain the
original while the carrier maintains the electronic scanned electronic image along with any
supporting documents.

( printed page 32861) The guidance is applicable to all interstate drivers of CMVs subject
to the Federal Motor Carrier Safety Regulations (FMCSRs).

Effective Date: This regulatory guidance is effective on June 10, 2010.

Thomas L. Yager, Chief, Driver and Carrier Operations Division, Office of Bus and Truck
Standards and Operations, Federal Motor Carrier Safety Administration, 1200 New Jersey Ave.,
SE., Washington, DC 20590.

The Motor Carrier Safety Act of 1984 (Pub. L. 98-554, Title II, 98 Stat. 2832, October 30,
1984) (the 1984 Act) provides authority to regulate drivers, motor carriers, and vehicle
equipment. It requires the Secretary of Transportation to prescribe regulations which ensure
that: (1) CMVs are maintained, equipped, loaded, and operated safely; (2) the
responsibilities imposed on operators of CMVs do not impair their ability to operate the
vehicles safely; (3) the physical condition of operators of CMVs is adequate to enable them
to operate the vehicles safely; and (4) the operation of CMVs does not have a deleterious
effect on the physical condition of the operators. ( 49 U.S.C. 31136(a) ). Section 211 of
the 1984 Act also grants the Secretary broad power in carrying out motor carrier safety
statutes and regulations to "prescribe recordkeeping and reporting requirements" and to
"perform other acts the Secretary considers appropriate." ( 49 U.S.C. 31133(a)(8) and (10) ,
respectively).

The Administrator of FMCSA has been delegated authority under 49 CFR 1.73(g) to carry out
the functions vested in the Secretary of Transportation by 49 U.S.C. chapter 311 ,
subchapters I and III, relating to commercial motor vehicle programs and safety regulation.

This document provides regulatory guidance concerning 49 CFR 395.8 , "Driver's record of
duty status," specifically paragraphs (a)(1) and (i). Currently, 49 CFR 395.8(a)(1) states,
"Every driver who operates a commercial motor vehicle [in interstate commerce] shall record
his/her duty status, in duplicate, for each 24 hour period." Section 395.8(i) requires that
drivers submit or forward by mail the original records of duty status (RODS) to the regular
employing motor carrier within 13 days following the completion of the form.

With regard to record retention, 49 CFR 395.8(k)(1) states, "Each motor carrier shall
maintain records of duty status and all supporting documents for each driver it employs for
a period of six months from the date of receipt." Section 395.8(k)(2) states, "The driver
shall retain a copy of each record of duty status for the previous 7 consecutive days which
shall be in his/her possession and available for inspection while on duty."

FMCSA currently requires ( 49 CFR 390.31 , Copies of records or documents) that records and
documents specified under this subchapter be preserved in their original form for the
periods specified, unless the records and documents are suitably photographed and the
microfilm is retained in lieu of the original record for the required retention period. As
used in §&thinsp;390.31, "this subchapter" means Subchapter B [ 49 CFR parts 350-399 ] of
Chapter III of Subtitle B of Title 49, Code of Federal Regulations (CFRs). Section 390.31(b)
provides criteria for use in determining whether photographic copies of records may be
acceptable in lieu of original records.

On April 4, 1997 ( 62 FR 16370 , 16408 ), FMCSA published "Regulatory Guidance for the
Federal Motor Carrier Safety Regulations" which included guidance concerning 49 CFR 390.31 .
The guidance reads as follows:

Question: May records required by the FMCSRs be maintained in an electronic format?

Guidance: Yes, provided the motor carrier can produce the information required by the
regulations. Documents requiring a signature must be capable of replication ( i.e.,
photocopy, facsimile, etc.) in such form that will provide an opportunity for signature
verification upon demand. If computer records are used, all of the relevant data on the
original documents must be included in order for the record to be valid.

FMCSA received an exemption application from a motor carrier requesting relief from the
requirement to prepare RODS in duplicate. The motor carrier explained that it plans to
implement a new approach for receiving and processing RODS. Its drivers would complete their
RODS and then electronically scan them at one of the carrier's terminals or at a truck stop
that offers the scanning service. The image would then be electronically transmitted to the
motor carrier while the driver retains the original paper RODS.

Upon reviewing the carrier's application for an exemption, FMCSA determined that an
exemption is not necessary. Admittedly, 49 CFR 395.8(a)(1) and 395.8(i) could be construed
as limiting the processing of RODS between drivers and carriers to the submission of the
original paper documents either in person or via mail, thereby necessitating the preparation
of the RODS, in duplicate. However, FMCSA has opted for a more pragmatic application of the
rules.

Because existing regulations concerning the preservation of records ( 49 CFR 390.31 ) allow
motor carriers to store electronically a scanned image of the original RODS submitted by
drivers and essentially dispose of the original paper document, there is no discernible
safety benefit to disallowing the driver's submission of a scanned image of the RODS to the
carrier. There is no readily apparent reason that the location at which the original RODS is
scanned into an image for subsequent electronic storage and retrieval should matter for the
purposes of compliance with the recordkeeping requirements. Furthermore, there is no
apparent reason to limit the means of submitting the information to the carrier; electronic
submission is an efficient and reasonable alternative to mailing the document to the carrier
or delivering it in person.

Based on a review of the regulatory text of 49 CFR 395.8(a)(1) , 395.8(i) and 395 .(k), and
in consideration of 49 CFR 390.31 and the 1997 regulatory guidance concerning electronic
recordkeeping, FMCSA issues guidance allowing interstate CMV drivers to prepare single
originals of RODS and to submit electronically to the employing motor carrier a scanned
image of the completed RODS.

Section 395.8&emsp;Driver's Record of Duty Status

Question: Are drivers who electronically scan a copy of their original record of duty status
(RODS) for subsequent submission to the motor carrier required to prepare the RODS in
duplicate?

Guidance: No. Although 49 CFR 395.8(a)(1) states, "Every driver who operates a commercial
motor vehicle [in interstate commerce] shall record his/her duty status, in duplicate, for
each 24-hour period," the intent of the requirement may be fulfilled through

( printed page 32862) the electronic submission of a scanned image of the original
handwritten RODS to the regular employing motor carrier within 13 days following the
completion of the form, while the driver retains the original records for the current day
and the previous 7 consecutive days. Because existing regulations concerning the
preservation of records ( 49 CFR 390.31 ) allow motor carriers to store electronically a
scanned image of the original handwritten RODS submitted by drivers and essentially dispose
of the original paper document, there is no adverse impact on the enforcement of the HOS
regulations, and subsequently no compromise on the application of the safety requirement by
allowing the driver to submit a scanned image of the original signed RODS to the regular
employing motor carrier within 13 days of the completion of the record. Motor carriers must
maintain the scanned image of the signed RODS and all supporting documents for each driver
for a period of six months from the date of receipt ( 49 CFR 395.8(k) ).

Associate Administrator for Enforcement and Program Delivery.


----------------------------------------------------------------------


79 FR 39342 - Hours of Service for Commercial Motor Vehicle Drivers; Regulatory Guidance Concerning Records of Duty Status Generated by Logging Software Programs
-----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------

Source: https://www.federalregister.gov/documents/2014/07/10/2014-15951/hours-of-service-
for-commercial-motor-vehicle-drivers-regulatory-guidance-concerning-records-of-duty

Federal Motor Carrier Safety Administration (FMCSA), DOT.

FMCSA revises its regulatory guidance concerning records of duty status (RODS) generated by
logging software programs on laptop computers, tablets, and smartphones. These logging
software programs are used by certain drivers to help them prepare RODS, but the computers,
tablets, and smartphones with such software do not meet FMCSA's requirements for automatic
on-board recording devices (AOBRDs). The revision of the guidance clarifies the relationship
between the Agency's policy concerning the use of logging software programs and the Agency's
January 4, 2011, regulatory guidance concerning electronic signatures by removing the
requirement that drivers print and sign paper copies of RODS generated through such logging
software, provided the driver is able to sign the RODS electronically at the end of each
work day and display the electronic record at the roadside. This guidance provides the motor
carrier industry, and Federal, State, and local motor carrier enforcement officials with
uniform information regarding computer software and devices used by drivers to assist them
with hours-of-service (HOS) recordkeeping. All prior Agency interpretations and regulatory
guidance, including memoranda and letters, are rescinded to the extent they are inconsistent
with this guidance.

This regulatory guidance is effective July 10, 2014.

Thomas L. Yager, Chief, Driver and Carrier Operations Division, Federal Motor Carrier Safety
Administration, 1200 New Jersey Avenue SE., Washington, DC 20590; telephone 202-366-4325;
email mcpsd@dot.gov .

The Motor Carrier Safety Act of 1984 (Pub. L. 98-554, Title II, 98 Stat. 2832, October 30,
1984) (the 1984 Act) authorizes the Secretary of Transportation to regulate commercial motor
vehicles (CMVs) and equipment, and the drivers and motor carriers that operate them. Section
211 of the 1984 Act also gives the Secretary broad power to "prescribe recordkeeping and
reporting requirements" and to "perform other acts the Secretary considers appropriate." (
49 U.S.C. 31133(a)(8) and (10) ). The Administrator of FMCSA has been delegated authority
under 49 CFR 1.87(f) to carry out the functions vested in the Secretary by 49 U.S.C. chapter
311 , subchapters I and III, relating to CMV programs and safety regulation.

On January 4, 2011, FMCSA published regulatory guidance for §&thinsp;390.31 of the Federal
Motor Carrier Safety Regulations (FMCSRs) concerning electronic signatures and documents (
76 FR 411 ). The guidance explained how electronic signatures could be used under the
existing regulations while the Agency considers a notice-and-comment rulemaking to amend the
FMCSRs to explicitly allow electronic signatures on documents required by the safety
regulations. The guidance provides a short-term solution for allowing the use of electronic
signatures, to the greatest extent possible under the existing regulations, consistent with
the requirements of the Government Paperwork Elimination Act of 1998 (GPEA) and the
Electronic Signatures in Global and National Commerce Act of 2000 (E-SIGN). The purpose of
GPEA is to improve customer service and governmental efficiency through the use of
information technology. The purpose of E-SIGN is to promote the use of electronic
recordkeeping in private commerce by establishing legal equivalence between traditional
paper-based methods and electronic methods.

On April 28, 2014, FMCSA published a notice of proposed rulemaking concerning "Electronic
Documents and Signatures" ( 79 FR 23306 ). The proposed regulatory amendments would permit
the use of electronic methods to sign, certify, generate, exchange or maintain records so
long as the documents accurately reflect the information in the record and can be used for
their intended purpose.

Generally, drivers of CMVs as defined in 49 CFR 390.5 who are subject to the Federal hours-
of-service requirements must record their duty status for each 24-hour period. However, the
rules provide limited exemptions to the RODS requirements, including an exemption for the
following drivers:

CMV drivers (whether the vehicles require a commercial driver's license (CDL) or not) who
operate within 100 air-miles of their normal work reporting location and satisfy the time
limitations and recordkeeping requirements of §&thinsp;395.1(e)(1).

Drivers of property-carrying CMVs for which a CDL is not required and who operate within a
150 air-mile radius of the location where the driver reports for duty and satisfy the time
limitations and recordkeeping requirements of §&thinsp;395.1(e)(2). [ 1 ]

For drivers that must prepare RODS, 49 CFR 395.8 specifies a particular "grid" or type of
form that must be used to document the driver's activities during the 24-hour period.

As an alternative to written RODS, 49 CFR 395.15 allows the use of AOBRDs. The AOBRD
regulation was adopted in 1988. To be considered a compliant device, an AOBRD must be
integrally synchronized with specific operations of the CMV in which it is installed (see 49
CFR 395.2 , Definitions, AOBRD). Use of AOBRDs is voluntary.

Several vendors market software products to assist the driver in recording and storing RODS
information electronically. Laptop computers, tablets, and smartphones running driver
logging software should not be confused with AOBRDs because the devices are not integrally
synchronized with the specific operations of the CMV on which they are being used. Drivers
must manually input their duty status information (e.g., driving time, on-duty not driving,
etc.) directly into the computer, tablet or smartphone.

Although FMCSA has allowed CMV drivers to use driver logging software, the Agency's
regulatory guidance explains that drivers must print and sign the RODS that these devices
generate, for each 24-hour period, just as the driver would with any handwritten RODS. The
existing Questions 27 and 28 for §&thinsp;395.8 (available through www.fmcsa.dot.gov ) read
as follows:

" Question 27: Would a driver who prepares his/her log on a computer, `digitally' signs the
log, and then transmits it directly to the carrier, be in compliance with 49 CFR 395.8(f)(2)
?

Guidance: No. The driver's activities must be recorded in accordance with the provisions of
§&thinsp;395.8(f)(2). This section requires that all entries relating to driver's duty
status must be legible and in the driver's own handwriting."

" Question 28: May a driver use a computer to generate his or her record

( printed page 39343) of duty status (log book) and then manually sign the computer
printouts in lieu of handwritten logs?

Guidance: A driver may use a computer to generate the graph grid and entries for the record
of duty status or log books, provided the computer-generated output includes the minimum
information required by §&thinsp;395.8 and is formatted in accordance with the rules. In
addition, the driver must:

1. Be capable of printing the record of duty status for the current 24-hour period at the
request of an enforcement officer.

2. Print the record of duty status at the end of each 24-hour period, and sign it in his or
her handwriting to certify that all entries required by this section are true and correct.

3. Maintain a copy of printed and signed records of duty status for the previous 7
consecutive days and make it available for inspection at the request of an enforcement
officer."

Electronic Signatures and Hours-of-Service Records

Question 11 from the January 2011 regulatory guidance notice for §&thinsp;390.31 advises
motor carriers and other parties that they may use electronic methods to generate, sign,
maintain and/or exchange any document that is generated and maintained or exchanged by
private parties, regardless of whether FMCSA subsequently requires them to be produced or
displayed to Federal and State enforcement personnel. The list of examples of documents
includes RODS.

The Regulatory Guidance for §&thinsp;390.31 was originally developed to allow motor carriers
to store documents in electronic format. The January 2011 revisions to the Guidance expand
the scope to allow documents to be created, maintained, and generated in electronic format.
Specifically, as stated in the January 2011 Notice:

Any electronic record or signature is considered the legal equivalent of a paper document or
signature if it is the functional equivalent with respect to integrity, accuracy, and
accessibility.

[This revised] guidance establishes parity between paper and electronic records and
signatures, greatly expanding interested parties' ability to use electronic records.

The January 2011 regulatory guidance is consistent with the Agency's previous policy
concerning RODS prepared using logging software in that it continues to accept them as
equivalent to paper documents. Signatures may be electronically embedded on printed copies
or may be manually added to printed copies of the records.

Guidance Question 9 to §&thinsp;390.31 provides that documents stored electronically must be
capable of being reproduced in the same time frame as the original document. A paper RODS
must be presented to an enforcement official upon request. Therefore, the electronically-
stored RODS must also be printed for an enforcement official upon request during a roadside
inspection.

Today's guidance harmonizes the January 2011 guidance interpreting §&thinsp;390.31 with the
previously issued guidance interpreting 49 CFR 395.8 . FMCSA withdraws Question 27 for
§&thinsp;395.8, which currently states that a driver who prepares his/her log on a computer,
`digitally' signs the log, and then transmits it directly to the carrier, would not be in
compliance with 49 CFR 395.8(f)(2) . In addition, FMCSA revises the response to Question 28
for §&thinsp;395.8 to make clear that a driver may create, sign and store electronic RODS if
certain conditions are met.

Hours of Service for Commercial Motor Vehicle Drivers Regulatory Guidance for 49 CFR 395.8 ,
Driver's Record of Duty Status

Question 28: May a driver use a computer, tablet, or smartphone (that is not an Automatic
On-Board Recording Device) to create, electronically sign, and store the record of duty
status (RODS)?

Guidance: Yes. A driver may make manual duty-status entries to a computer, tablet, or
smartphone program that is used to generate the graph grid and entries for the record of
duty status (RODS) or log book, provided the electronically-generated display (if any) and
output includes the minimum information required by §&thinsp;395.8 and is formatted in
accordance with that section. The driver must sign the RODS (manually or electronically) at
the end of each 24-hour period to certify that all required entries are true and correct.

The driver must print and manually sign the RODS daily.

The driver must have in his or her possession the printed and signed RODS for the prior
seven consecutive days (if required on those days).

The driver should be given an opportunity to print and manually sign the current day's RODS
at the time of the inspection.

At the time of an inspection of records by an enforcement official, the driver may display
the current and prior seven days RODS to the official on the device's screen.

If the enforcement official requests printed copies of the RODS, the driver must be given an
opportunity to print the current and prior seven days RODS (if required on those days) at
the time of inspection.

1. &thinsp;A driver who qualifies for this exception is not eligible for the 100 air-mile
exception under 49 CFR 395.1(e)(1) .
