
--- page 1 ---
10
INTERSTATE TRUCK DRIVER’S GUIDE TO HOURS OF SERVICE FOR PROPERTY CARRIERS 
30-Minute Rest Break
The HOS regulations require a 30-minute consecutive break from driving after driving for 8 hours.  
The 30-minute break is required after 8 cumulative, not consecutive, driving hours. The 30-minute 
break requ
ired by § 395.3(a)(3)(ii) may be taken either on duty, off duty, or in the sleeper berth. 
Many CMV drivers interrupt their driving time during normal business operations to complete tasks, such  
as loading or unloading a truck, completing paperwork, or stopping for fuel. These interruptions can be 
used to satisfy the 30-minute break from driving, if consecutive. For example, a driver could take 15 minutes 
of on-duty not driving time plus 15 minutes of off-duty time to satisfy his or her 30-minute requirement, as 
long as those two periods are consecutive. Short, non-consecutive periods cannot be combined to reach 30 
minutes of non-driving time.
The 30-minute break does not increase the maximum driving time during the work shift, or allow driving 
after the 14th hour from the beginning of the work shift. The 30-minute break is explained in greater detail 
throughout this document. 
The 30-minute interruption of driving time provision is not applicable to drivers who qualify for either of 
the “short haul operations” exceptions outlined in § 395.1(e)(1) or (2). See pages 12–13 for a description of 
the short haul exceptions and to determine if either exception applies to you.
60/70-Hour On-Duty Limit
The 60/70-hour on-duty limit is based on a 7- or 8-day period, depending on your motor carrier’s operation, 
starting at the time specified by your motor carrier for the start of a 24-hour period. It applies to property- 
carrying CMVs, and is in addition to the other limits previously explained. It is total on-duty time, not just  
driving time. Once you reach the limit, you can do other work, but you are not permitted to drive.
This limit is sometimes thought of as a “weekly” limit, but is not based on a “set” week, such as Sunday 
through Saturday. The limit is based on a “rolling” or “floating” 7- or 8-day period. The oldest day’s hours 
drop off at the end of each day when you calculate the total on-duty time for the past 7 or 8 days. For 
example, if you operate on a 70-hour/8-day schedule, the current day would be the newest day of your 
8-day period and the hours you worked 9 days ago would drop out of the calculation. This regulation is
found in § 395.3(b).
EXAMPLE : In the table below, you have accumulated a total of 67 on-duty (driving and on-duty) hours 
in Days 1–8. In this example, you are operating on the 70-hour/8-day rule, and therefore are in compliance 
with the rules at this point as you have only worked 67 hours in the 70-hour period. Once you reach the 
70-hour mark in an 8-day period, you cannot drive until you have taken enough off-duty hours to legally
operate again.
In this particular example when you reach the 9th day of the cycle (the second Monday) the hours from 
Day 1 of the cycle (the first Sunday) would drop off and you would then calculate your hours for Days 2–9 
(Monday–Monday). Since you were on duty for 6 hours on the second Monday, this totals 73 hours for the 
prior 8 days and you could be in violation if you drove past the 70-hour mark during the last 3 hours over 70. 
On Day 10 of the cycle you do not accumulate any on-duty or driving hours, which brings your total for 
the last 8 days (Days 3–10) to 63 total hours. You are in compliance since you worked fewer than 70 hours 
in the previous 8-day period. 
These same principles apply for the 60-hour/7-day HOS rule. Additionally, any time you take 34 consecutive 
hours off duty, this resets your “weekly” cycle of either 60/7 or 70/8 back to zero total hours accumulated. 
Violations of the 60/7 or 70/8 hour rules can only occur if you drive a CMV past these limits as you can 
remain on-duty not driving.
--- page 2 ---
11
INTERSTATE TRUCK DRIVER’S GUIDE TO HOURS OF SERVICE FOR PROPERTY CARRIERS 
INTERSTATE TRUCK DRIVER’S GUIDE TO HOURS OF SERVICE FOR PROPERTY CARRIERS 
70-hour/8-day rule: Calculating the rolling 8-day total
You are required to follow one of these two limits:
1. If your company does not operate vehicles every day of the week, you are not allowed to drive a CMV after
you’ve been on duty 60 hours during any 7-consecutive days. Once you reach the 60-hour limit, you will not
be able to drive a CMV again until you have dropped below 60 hours for a 7-consecutive-day period. You
may do other work, but you cannot do any more driving until you are off duty enough days to get below
the limit. Any other hours you work, whether they are for a motor carrier or someone else, must be added
to the total.
2. If your company operates vehicles every day of the week, your employer may assign you to the 70-hour/
8-day schedule. This means that you are not allowed to drive a CMV after you’ve been on duty 70 hours
in any 8-consecutive days. Once you reach the 70-hour limit, you will not be able to drive again until you
have dropped below 70 hours for an 8-consecutive-day period. You may do other work, but you cannot
do any more driving until you get below the limit. Any other hours you work, whether they are for a
motor carrier or someone else, must be added to the total.
34-Hour Restart
The HOS regulations allow property-carrying CMV drivers to “restart” their 60- or 70-hour clock calculations 
by taking 34 or more consecutive hours off duty or in the sleeper berth, or some combination of both. These 
regulations are found in §§ 395.3(c)(1) and (c)(2). After you have taken at least 34 consecutive hours off duty, 
you have the full 60 or 70 hours available again. The use of a “valid” 34-hour restart resets a driver’s “weekly” 
hours back to zero. Use of the 34-hour restart is optional; it is not mandatory.
EXAMPLE: If you follow the 70-hour/8-day limit and work 14 hours per day for 5 days in a row, you will 
have been on duty for 70 hours. You would not be able drive again until you drop below 70 hours worked 
in an 8-day period. However, if your company allows you to use the 34-hour restart provision, you would 
have driving time available immediately after 34 consecutive hours off duty. You would then begin a new 
period of 8 consecutive days and have 70 hours available.
# Day Hours
1 Sunday 0
2 Monday 10
3 Tuesday 8.5
4 Wednesday 12.5
5 Thursday 9
6 Friday 10
7 Saturday 12
8 Sunday 5
9 Monday 6
10 Tuesday 0
8-day total =
67 hours
(Days 1–8)
8-day total =
73 hours
(Days 2–9)
8-day total =
63 hours
(Days 3–10)
--- page 3 ---
12
INTERSTATE TRUCK DRIVER’S GUIDE TO HOURS OF SERVICE FOR PROPERTY CARRIERS 
WHAT IS THE ADVERSE DRIVING CONDITIONS EXCEPTION?
If unexpected adverse driving conditions slow 
you down, you may drive up to 2 additional 
hours to complete what could have been driven 
in normal conditions. This means you could 
drive for up to 13 hours, which is 2 hours more 
than allowed under normal conditions. Adverse 
driving conditions mean things that you could 
not anticipate, like a highway blocked by a crash  
or the sudden appearance of fog. Adverse  
driving conditions do not include situations  
such as congested traffic during typical “rush  
hour” periods. 
The adverse driving condition exception also 
allows an extension of the 14-hour “driving 
window” by up to 2 hours, consistent with the 
2-hour extension of driving time permitted.
This extension does not, however, increase any
available driving time limits beyond the current
60/7 and 70/8 day limits in § 395.3(b).
The adverse driving conditions definition covers conditions that are unknown, or could not reasonably 
be known, to the driver immediately before the start of the duty day or before resuming driving after 
a qualifying sleeper berth rest break, or to the motor carrier immediately before dispatching the driver. 
Drivers using an electronic logging device (ELD) are required by § 395.28(c) to annotate the adverse 
driving conditions on their record of duty status (RODS), and include details about the condition. Drivers 
using paper logs or alternative logging systems are encouraged to similarly note when they experience 
adverse driving conditions. 
This regulation is found in § 395.1(b)(1), and the definition of “adverse driving conditions” is found in § 395.2.
WHAT IS THE CDL SHORT-HAUL EXCEPTION?
The short-haul exception for drivers operating a CMV requiring a commercial driver’s license (CDL) is found 
in § 395.1(e)(1). Under this exception, a driver does not have to comply with the requirements of §§ 395.8 or 
395.11. To qualify for the exception a driver must: 
1. Return to the normal work reporting location and be released from work within 14 consecutive hours;
2. Operate within a 150 air-mile radius (172.6 statute miles) of the normal work reporting location; and
3. Have at least 10 consecutive hours off duty separating each 14 hours on duty. Drivers utilizing the
short-haul exception continue to be limited to 11 hours of driving time.
The short-haul exception in § 395.1(e)(1) allows a driver to use a time record in place of an electronic or 
paper RODS, provided the specific rule provisions are met. The time records must include the time the driver 
reports for duty each day, total number of hours the driver is on duty for each day, and the time the driver 
is released each day. If the individual cannot meet the terms of the exception (e.g., the driver goes beyond 
the distance limitation or works too many hours), the driver must complete a RODS for that day as soon as 
the exception no longer applies. 
If the driver is required to complete a RODS 8 or fewer days out of the last 30 days, the driver can use a paper 
RODS for the day. If the driver is required to complete a RODS more than 8 days out of the last 30 days, the 
driver must use an ELD for the day. Federal ELD regulations are covered in a later section of this document. 
--- page 4 ---
13
INTERSTATE TRUCK DRIVER’S GUIDE TO HOURS OF SERVICE FOR PROPERTY CARRIERS 
INTERSTATE TRUCK DRIVER’S GUIDE TO HOURS OF SERVICE FOR PROPERTY CARRIERS 
When a property-carrying CMV driver is operating under the short-haul exception in § 395.1(e)(1), the driver 
is also excepted from having to take the required 30-minute break from driving time in (§ 395.3(a)(3)(ii)).
To summarize, to be able to use the short-haul exception, the property-carrying CMV driver must:
• Operate within a 150 air-miles radius;
• Not exceed a maximum duty period of 14 hours;
• Start and end his/her shift in the same location;
• Have at least 10 hours off between shifts.
The motor carrier that employs the driver must maintain and retain for a period of 6 months accurate and 
true time records showing:
• The time the driver reports for duty each day;
• The total number of hours the driver is on duty each day;
• The time the driver is released from duty each day; and
• The total time for the preceding 7 days in accordance with § 395.8(j)(2) for drivers used for the first
time or intermittently.
WHAT IS THE NON-CDL SHORT-HAUL EXCEPTION?
If you drive short distances in a property-carrying CMV that does not require a CDL, you might be able to 
use the non-CDL short-haul exception if you:
• Drive a truck that is a CMV that does not require a CDL; and
• Work within a 150 air-mile radius of your normal work reporting location and return to that location.
To qualify for the non-CDL short-haul exception:
• You must not drive past the 14th hour after coming on duty 5 days in any period of 7 consecutive days; and
• You must not drive past the 16th hour after coming on duty 2 days in any period of 7 consecutive days.
Under this exception you are not required to keep a log book, but your company must keep accurate and 
true time records for 6 months showing: 
1. The time the driver reports for duty each day;
2. The total number of hours the driver is on duty each day;
3. The time the driver is released from duty each day; and
4. The total time for the preceding 7 days in accordance with § 395.8(j)(2) for drivers used for the first time
or intermittently.
If you come under this exception, you are not eligible for the § 395.1(e)(1) short-haul exception, 16-hour 
short-haul exception ( § 395.1(o)), or the split sleeper berth provision ( § 395.1(g)). If you qualify for this 
exception, you are exempt from the requirements of §§ 395.3(a)(2), 395.8, and 395.11. This regulation is 
found in § 395.1(e)(2).
--- page 5 ---
14
INTERSTATE TRUCK DRIVER’S GUIDE TO HOURS OF SERVICE FOR PROPERTY CARRIERS 
WHAT IS THE 16-HOUR SHORT-HAUL EXCEPTION?
If you are a property-carrying CMV driver and usually come back to your work-reporting location and 
go home at the end of your workday, you might be able to use the 16-hour short-haul exception. This 
exception allows you to extend the 14-consecutive-hour driving window to 16 hours once every 7 
consecutive days. 
In order to use this exception, you must do the following:
• You must return to your work reporting location that day, as well as for your last 5 duty tours.
• You must be released from duty within 16 hours after coming on duty.
• You may use this exception only once every 7 consecutive days (unless you took 34 consecutive hours
off to restart a 7/8-day period).
You are ineligible to use this exception if you use the “Non-CDL Short Haul Exception” explained earlier.
This regulation is found in § 395.1(o).
WHAT IS A “DRIVER’S DAILY LOG” AND ELECTRONIC LOGGING DEVICE (ELD)?
The tracking of a driver’s HOS limits is normally accomplished using an electronic logging device (ELD). 
This can also be done in written form if your time is not required to be recorded electronically. Most 
motor carriers and drivers who are required to maintain RODS under § 395.8(a) need to use an ELD to 
record their HOS. The rule applies to CMV operators, and to Canadian- and Mexican-domiciled drivers 
operating in the U.S., unless they qualify for an exception to the rule. For more information about ELDs,  
visit https://eld.fmcsa.dot.gov .

--- page 6 ---
15
INTERSTATE TRUCK DRIVER’S GUIDE TO HOURS OF SERVICE FOR PROPERTY CARRIERS 
INTERSTATE TRUCK DRIVER’S GUIDE TO HOURS OF SERVICE FOR PROPERTY CARRIERS 
WHAT MUST THE RECORD OF DUTY STATUS INCLUDE?
RODS, or a log, must include a 24-hour graph grid, which is shown in the regulations, and must include the 
following information on each page:
• Date. You must write dowwn the month, day, and year for the beginning of each 24-hour period.
(Multiple consecutive days off duty may be combined on one log page, with an explanation in
the “Remarks. ”)
• Tota
l miles driving today. You must write down the total number of miles you drove during the
24-hour period.
• Truck or tractor and trailer number. You must write down either the vehicle number(s) assigned by
your company, or the license number and licensing State for each truck (and trailer, if any) you drove
during the 24-hour period.
Shipping documents number(s)  
or name of shipper and commodity
Total miles
driving today
Date
Name of
carrier
Main  
office
address
24-hour
period
starting
time
Driver’s 
signature/ 
certification
Name of
co-driver
Total
hours
Truck or tractor and 
trailer number
Off 
Duty
Midnight         2          3           4           5          6           7           8           9          10        11       Noon      13        14         15         16         17        18         19         20         21         22        23
Sleeper 
Berth
Driving
On Duty
(Not 
Driving)
REMARKS
Remarks
U.S. DEPARTMENT OF TRANSPORTATION
DRIVER’S DAILY LOG
(ONE CALENDAR DAY — 24 HOURS)
ORIGINAL — Submit to carrier within 13 days
DUPLICATE — Driver retains possesion for eight days
(MONTH)         (DAY)           YEAR) (TOTAL MILES DRIVING TODAY)
(NAME OF CARRIER OR CARRIERS)
(MAIN OFFICE ADDRESS)
(DRIVER’S SIGNATURE IN FULL)
VEHICLE NUMBERS—(SHOW EACH UNIT)
I certify that these entries are true and correct
(NAME OF CO_DRIVER)
—
Pro or Shipping No.  
TOTAL
HOURS
Midnight         2          3           4           5          6           7           8           9          10        11       Noon      13        14         15         16         17        18         19         20         21         22        23
--- page 7 ---
16
INTERSTATE TRUCK DRIVER’S GUIDE TO HOURS OF SERVICE FOR PROPERTY CARRIERS 
• Name of carrier. You m ust write down the name of the motor carrier(s) you are working for. If you work
for more than one carrier in a 24-hour period, you must list the times you started and finished work for
each carrier.
• Main
 office address.  You must write down your carrier’s main office address. The city and State
are sufficient.
• Your s
ignature. You must certify that all of your entries are true and correct by signing your log with
your legal name or name of record.
• Name o
f co-driver. You must write down the name of your co-driver if you have one.
• Time base to be used. You must use the time zone in effect at your home terminal. Even if you cross
other time zones, record time as it is at your terminal. All drivers operating out of your home terminal
must use the same starting time for the 24-hour period, as designated by your employer.
• Remarks. This is the area where you must list the city, town, or village, and State abbreviation when a
change of duty status occurs. You should also explain any unusual circumstances or log entries that may be
unclear when reviewed later, such as encountering adverse driving conditions.
• Total hours. You must add and write down the total hours for each duty status at the right side of
the grid. The total of the entries must equal 24 hours (unless you are using one page to reflect several
consecutive days off duty).
• Shipping document number(s), or name of shipper and commodity. For each shipment, you
must write down a shipping document number (such as a shipping manifest number) or the name of
the shipper and what you are hauling.
The Graph Grid
Here is what your graph grid must look like. The other required information may be placed anywhere on 
the page outside the grid.
You must keep the grid on your log current to your last change of duty status. For example, if you are driving 
and an inspector stops you and asks to see your logbook, the final entry should show the time and place that 
you last started driving.
Off 
Duty
Midnight         2          3           4           5          6           7           8           9          10        11       Noon      13        14         15         16         17        18         19         20         21         22        23
Sleeper 
Berth
Driving
On Duty
(Not 
Driving)
REMARKS
--- page 8 ---
17
INTERSTATE TRUCK DRIVER’S GUIDE TO HOURS OF SERVICE FOR PROPERTY CARRIERS 
INTERSTATE TRUCK DRIVER’S GUIDE TO HOURS OF SERVICE FOR PROPERTY CARRIERS 
The grid will have the starting time and the hours marked above it. You must draw lines on the grid as follows:
• Off Duty. Draw a solid line between the appropriate time markers to show the periods of time you
are off duty.
• Sleeper Berth. Draw a solid line between the appropriate time markers to show the periods of time
you are resting in a sleeper berth.
• Driving. Draw a solid line between the appropriate time markers to show the periods of time you are
behind the wheel of a CMV in operation.
• On Duty (Not Driving). Draw a solid line between the appropriate time markers to show the periods
of time when you are on duty, but not driving a CMV. Time spent driving a non-CMV for a carrier would
be included here.
The “Remarks”
Each time you change your duty status, you must write down the name of the city, town, or village, and 
State abbreviation, in the Remarks section. If the change of duty status takes place at a location other than 
a city, town, or village, you must show one of the following:
• The highway number and the nearest milepost followed by the name of the nearest city, town, or
village and State abbreviation;
• The highway number and the name of the service plaza followed by the name of the nearest city, town,
or village and State abbreviation; or
• The highway numbers of the two nearest intersecting roadways followed by the name of the nearest
city, town, or village, and State abbreviation.
You may write other things in the Remarks section, such as shipping information, a note about adverse 
driving conditions, or when you cross a State line.

--- page 9 ---
18
INTERSTATE TRUCK DRIVER’S GUIDE TO HOURS OF SERVICE FOR PROPERTY CARRIERS 
A Completed Grid
In this sample log grid, a driver we’ll call John Doe went from Richmond, Virginia, to Newark, New Jersey. 
The driver’s day went like this:
• John Doe reported for work at 6:00 a.m. He helped load, checked with dispatch, and did a pre-trip
inspection. This is on-duty time. John marked midnight to 6:00 a.m. as off duty, then drew a line
straight down to on duty and drew a horizontal line from 6:00 a.m. to 7:30 a.m.
• After driving 1½ hours, John stopped to fuel his truck. John marked the driving time on the driving line.
The time at the truck stop (½ hour) is marked on duty (not driving).
• John then drove for 2½ hours to the Baltimore terminal where he had lunch. He again recorded his
driving time. After lunch he recorded his lunch time as off duty since he had instructions from his
carrier to log his lunch time as off duty and did not have any work responsibilities during this time.
• After lunch John drove for 2 more hours and stopped to make a delivery. He recorded his time again.
Following the half-hour delivery stop, which he recorded as on duty (not driving), he started driving again.
• After ½ hour of driving, John stopped, recorded his driving  time, and went into the sleeper berth from
4:00 p.m. to 5:45 p.m.
• At 5:45 p.m. John recorded his sleeper berth  time and began driving again. He reached the Newark
terminal at 7:00 p.m., did a post-trip inspection, and finished his log and other paperwork.
• He went off duty at 9:00 p.m.
Notice that John was on duty past the 14th hour since he started this driving window at 6:00 a.m. There is no 
problem with being on duty longer than 14 hours as long as there is no CMV driving time after the 14th hour.
In the Remarks section, John wrote down the locations of duty status changes as follows:
• Reported for work at Richmond, VA.
• Stopped and fueled truck in Fredericksburg, VA.
• Ate lunch in Baltimore, MD.
• Made a delivery stop in Philadelphia, PA.
• Entered sleeper the berth in Cherry Hill, NJ.
• Drove to Newark, NJ, checked out, and went off duty.
Off 
Duty
Midnight         2          3           4           5          6           7           8           9          10        11       Noon      13        14         15         16         17        18         19         20         21         22        23
Sleeper 
Berth
Driving
On Duty
(Not 
Driving)
REMARKS
Richmond, VAFredericksburg, VABaltimore, MDPhiladelphia, PACherry Hill, NJNewark, NJ
--- page 10 ---
19
INTERSTATE TRUCK DRIVER’S GUIDE TO HOURS OF SERVICE FOR PROPERTY CARRIERS 
INTERSTATE TRUCK DRIVER’S GUIDE TO HOURS OF SERVICE FOR PROPERTY CARRIERS 
A Completed Log
After you have completed your log, the regulations allow you 13 days to get the original copy to your carrier. 
You must keep a copy of your completed log for the next 7 consecutive days. The copies must be available for 
inspection by law enforcement officers.
Any time you work for more than one motor carrier during a 24-hour period, you must make extra copies 
and give a copy of your log to each motor carrier. The log must include:
• All duty time for the entire 24-hour period,
• The name of each motor carrier you worked for during the 24-hour period, and
• The beginning and finishing time, including a.m. or p.m., worked for each motor carrier.
HOURS OF SERVICE RESOURCES
To access additional HOS resources, visit FMCSA’s HOS web page at https://www.fmcsa.dot.gov/regulations/
hours-of-service . 
Off 
Duty
Midnight         2          3           4           5          6           7           8           9          10        11       Noon      13        14         15         16         17        18         19         20         21         22        23
Sleeper 
Berth
Driving
On Duty
(Not 
Driving)
REMARKS
U.S. DEPARTMENT OF TRANSPORTATION
DRIVER’S DAILY LOG
(ONE CALENDAR DAY — 24 HOURS)
ORIGINAL — Submit to carrier within 13 days
DUPLICATE — Driver retains possesion for eight days
(MONTH)         (DAY)           YEAR) (TOTAL MILES DRIVING TODAY)
(NAME OF CARRIER OR CARRIERS)
(MAIN OFFICE ADDRESS)
(DRIVER’S SIGNATURE IN FULL)
VEHICLE NUMBERS—(SHOW EACH UNIT)
I certify that these entries are true and correct
(NAME OF CO_DRIVER)
—
Pro or Shipping No.  
TOTAL
HOURS
Midnight         2          3           4           5          6           7           8           9          10        11       Noon      13        14         15         16         17        18         19         20         21         22        23
Richmond,
 VA
Fredericksbur
g, VA
Baltimore
, MD
Philadelphia,
 PA
Cherry Hill,
 NJ
Newark,
 NJ
04   09 2021 350
John E. DoeJohn Doe’s Transportation
Washington, D.C.
123, 20544
101601
10
4.5
=24
1.75
7.75
--- page 11 ---
20
INTERSTATE TRUCK DRIVER’S GUIDE TO HOURS OF SERVICE FOR PROPERTY CARRIERS 
APPENDIX A: EXCEPTIONS FROM THE HOURS OF SERVICE REGULATIONS
Category Type of Exception Conditions That Must Be Met 49 CFR Section
150 air-mile radius 
driver (Short-haul 
exception)
• ELD or logbook
and suppor
ting
documents
 not
required
• 30-minute rest
break appl
icable to
property ca
rriers
does not apply
• Report and return to work reporting location
within 14 consecutive hours
• Stay within 150 air-mile radius of work
reporting l
ocation
• Employer must keep time records showing time
in, time out
, and total number of hours on duty
• The motor carrier that employs the driver
maintains an
d retains (for a period of 6 months)
accurate and true time records showing:
– The time the driver reports for duty each day;
–  The total number of hours the driver is on
duty each day;
–  The time the driver is released from duty
each day;
–  T
he total time for the preceding 7 days in
accordance with § 395.8(j)(2) for drivers used
for the first time or intermittently.
• Property-carrying CMV driver must have at least 10
consecutive hours off duty separating each 14 hours
on duty and cannot exceed 11 hours driving
§ 395.1(e)(1)
150 air-mile radius 
driver (Short-haul 
exception–non  
CDL driver,  
property-carrying)
• 16-hour driving
windows allow
ed
twice per 7-
consecuti
ve day
period, or after
any 34-hou
r restart
• ELD or logbook
and suppor
ting
documents
 not
required
• 30-minute break
not require
d
• Vehicle does not require CDL
• Report and return to normal work reporting
location e
very day
• Stay within 150 air-mile radius of work
reporting l
ocation
• Employer must keep time records showing time
in, time out
, and total number of hours on duty
• The motor carrier that employs the driver
maintains an
d retains (for a period of 6
months) ac
curate and true time records showing:
–  The time the driver reports for duty
each day;
–  T
he total number of hours the driver is on
duty each day;
–  The time the driver is released from duty
each day;
–  T
he total time for the preceding 7 days in
accordance with § 395.8(j)(2) for drivers used
for the first time or intermittently.
• Property-carrying non-CDL holder must not drive
after the 14th hour after coming on duty for 5 days
of any period of 7 consecutive days, or after the
16th hour after coming on duty for 2 days of any
period of 7 consecutive days.
§ 395.1(e)(2)
--- page 12 ---
21
INTERSTATE TRUCK DRIVER’S GUIDE TO HOURS OF SERVICE FOR PROPERTY CARRIERS 
INTERSTATE TRUCK DRIVER’S GUIDE TO HOURS OF SERVICE FOR PROPERTY CARRIERS 
Category Type of Exception Conditions That Must Be Met 49 CFR Section
Adverse driving 
conditions
• Up to 2 additional
hours of driving
time
• Up to 2 additional
hours “driving
window”
• Weather or traffic condition must be unknown,
or could not r
easonably be known, to a motor
carrier immediately before dispatching the
driver, or t
o a driver before driving at the start
of the duty da
y or after a qualifying rest break
as defined u
nder the sleeper berth exception.
§ 395.1(b)(1)
§ 395.2
Agricultural 
operations
•
All HOS regulations • Transporting agricultural commodities or
farm suppl
ies for agricultural purposes
• Within 150 air-miles of the agricultural
commodit
ies’ source, and 150 air miles from
final dest
ination if transporting livestock,
or farm supp
lies’ distribution point
• During a State’s declared planting and
harvesti
ng season
§ 395.1(k)
§ 395.2
Agricultural (Farm 
Vehicle Operations; 
10,001 through
26,000 lbs. GVW/
GVWR)
• AII HOS regulations,
among others
• Must be a “covered farm vehicle” as defined
in § 390.5T
• D
riven by the owner or operator of a farm or
ranch or by a fa
mily member or employee of
that perso
n
• Transporting agricultural commodities, livestock,
machinery, or supplies to or from the farm
or ranch
• Re
gistered in a State with a license plate or
some other d
esignation of identifying it as a
farm vehicl
e to law enforcement officials
• Not for-hire
• Not transporting hazardous materials
requiring pla
carding
• No limitation on distance for these lighter
vehicles (s
ee next row in table)
§ 390.5T
§ 390.39(a)(3)
Agricultural (Farm 
Vehicle Operations;  
26,001 lbs. or greater  
GVW/GVWR)
• AII HOS regulations,
among others
• Same conditions as a covered farm vehicle
weighing be
tween 10,001 and 26,001 lbs.
• Anywhere in the vehicle’s home State or
extendin
g into another State within a 150
air-mile ra
dius (172.6 land miles) of the
operator
’s farm or ranch
§ 390.5T
§ 390.39(a)(3)
--- page 13 ---
22
INTERSTATE TRUCK DRIVER’S GUIDE TO HOURS OF SERVICE FOR PROPERTY CARRIERS 
Category Type of Exception Conditions That Must Be Met 49 CFR Section
Alaska • Property-carrying
CMVs are exempt
from §§ 395.3(a) 
and (b)
• Dri
ving for property- 
carrying CMV drivers
is limited to 15
hours of driv
ing
time follo
wing 10
consecut
ive hours
off duty
• Th
e driver cannot
drive after having
been on duty for
20 hours or mo
re
following 10
consecut
ive hours
off duty
• Th
e driver cannot
drive after having
been on duty for
70 hours in 7
consecuti
ve days
or 80 hours in 8
co
nsecutive days,
depending on
the motor car
rier’s
operations
• Drivers that
encounter ad
verse
driving conditions
may drive and
be permitted or
required to drive a
CMV for the period
of time needed to
complete the run
• Driving a CMV in Alaska § 395.1(h)
Construction 
materials and 
equipment
• 24 consecutive hours
off duty restarts
• 60-hour/7-day or
70-hour/8-day limit
• Transporting construction and pavement
material
s, construction equipment, and
construc
tion maintenance vehicles.
• To or from active construction site
• Stay within 75 air-miles of normal work
reporting l
ocation
• Does not apply to vehicles placarded for
hazardous
 materials
§ 395.1(m)
§ 395.2
--- page 14 ---
23
INTERSTATE TRUCK DRIVER’S GUIDE TO HOURS OF SERVICE FOR PROPERTY CARRIERS 
INTERSTATE TRUCK DRIVER’S GUIDE TO HOURS OF SERVICE FOR PROPERTY CARRIERS 
Category Type of Exception Conditions That Must Be Met 49 CFR Section
Driver’s record of 
duty status
• Electronic logging
device
A motor carrier may require a driver to record the 
driver’s duty status manually rather than require the 
use of an ELD if the driver is operating a CMV:
• In a manner requiring completion of a record
of duty statu
s on not more than 8 days within
any 30-day
 period;
• In a driveaway-towaway operation in which
the vehicle b
eing driven is part of the shipment
being delivered;
• In a driveaway-towaway operation in which the
vehicle being transported is a motor home or a
recreation vehicle trailer; or
• That was manufactured before model
year 2000.
§ 395.8(a)(1)(iii)(A)
Driver-  
salesperson
• Exempt from
provisions
 of
§ 395.3(b)
• Driver is employed solely by a private carrier of
property that is engaged in the selling of goods,
services, or use of goods and transporting those
good or services
• Stays within 100 miles of work
reporting l
ocation
• No more than half of all on-duty time
spent driv
ing
• Driving time does not exceed 40 hours
in any 7 conse
cutive days
§ 395.1(c)
§ 395.2
Emergency relief • All HOS
regulation
s,
among others
• D
eclared national, regional, State, or
local emerg
ency
• Must be providing direct assistance to
emergency rel
ief
§ 390.23
Emergency driving 
conditions
• All HOS
regulation
s
• Can only complete the current run
• Run could have reasonably been completed
if there wa
sn’t an emergency
§ 395.1(b)(2)
Federal 
government 
operated
• Al
l HOS
regulation
s,
among others
• N
one § 390.3T(f)(2)
--- page 15 ---
24
INTERSTATE TRUCK DRIVER’S GUIDE TO HOURS OF SERVICE FOR PROPERTY CARRIERS 
Category Type of Exception Conditions That Must Be Met 49 CFR Section
Fire and rescue, 
emergency  
operation 
(non-government)
• All HOS
regulation
s,
among others
• I nvolved in emergency and related operations § 390.3T(f)(5)
Ground water well 
drilling
• 24 consecutive hours
off duty restarts
60-hour/7-day or
70-hour/8-day limit
• Vehicle used primarily in transportation and
operatio
ns of a groundwater well drilling rig
§ 395.1(l)
§ 395.2
Hawaii • ELD or logbook not
required
• Employer keeps time records showing time in,
time out, and total number of hours on duty
§ 395.1(i)
Local government 
operated
• All HOS regulations,
among others
• None
• Intrastate exceptions may be different. Check
with State enforcement for details.
§ 390.3T(f)(2)
Movie and 
television 
production
• Exempt from
requirements of
§ 395.3(a)
• Transportation of property or passengers to
or from a the
atrical or television or motion
picture prod
uction site
•   Stays within 100 air-miles of normal work
reporting l
ocation
• Driver may not drive more than 10 hours
followin
g 8 consecutive hours off duty
• Driver may not drive for any period after
having be
en on duty 15 hours following 8
consecut
ive hours off duty
§ 395.1(p)
Oilfield operations • 24 consecutive
hours off duty
restarts the 70
hours in 8 days
calculation
s
• CMVs used exclusively in transportation
of oilfield
 equipment and servicing field
operatio
ns gas and oil industry
§ 395.1(d)(1)
Oilfield operations • Waiting time at
natural gas or oil
well site is recorded
as off-duty time;
waiting time not
counted against
14-hour clock
• Specially trained drivers operating specially
construc
ted vehicles used to service gas or
oil wells
• Wai
ting time must be shown separately
on RODS
§ 395.1(d)(2)
--- page 16 ---
25
INTERSTATE TRUCK DRIVER’S GUIDE TO HOURS OF SERVICE FOR PROPERTY CARRIERS 
INTERSTATE TRUCK DRIVER’S GUIDE TO HOURS OF SERVICE FOR PROPERTY CARRIERS 
Category Type of Exception Conditions That Must Be Met 49 CFR Section
Personal property 
occasional  
transportation
• All HOS
regulation
s,
among others
• T ransportation unrelated to any
commercial a
ctivity
§ 390.3T(f)(3)
Propane winter 
heating fuel;  
pipeline  
emergencies
• All HOS regulations • Regulations must prevent a driver from
responding
 to emergency conditions as defined
in § 390.5T
§ 390.3T(f)(7)
Railroad signal 
employees
• All HOS regulations • Provisions do not apply to a signal employee,
as defined in § 395.2, who operates a CMV, is
engaged in installing, repairing, or maintaining
signal systems, is employed by a railroad carrier
or a contrac
tor or subcontractor to a railroad
carrier, while regulated by the Federal Railroad
Administration
§ 395.1(r)
Retail store 
deliverie
s
• All time limits on
driving, duty
periods, b
reaks,
time off
• Local deliveries from retail stores and/or catalog
businesses to the ultimate consumer
• Stay within 100 air-miles of normal work
reporting l
ocation
• Only December 10 through December 2 5
§ 395.1(f)
School bus— 
contractor- 
operated
• All HOS regulations • Transportation of school children or school
personne
l from home to school and from
school to ho
me
§ 390.3T(f)(1)
School bus— 
government-  
operated
• See “Local govern -
ment operated”
entry above
Short-haul 
exception 
(16-hour) (CDL 
drivers)
Also see § 395.1(e)
(2) non-CDL driver
entry at beginning
of this table
• 16-hour duty period
allowed once per
7-day period,
or after any
34-hour res
tart
• Return to work reporting location that day
and for last 5 d
uty tours
• Be released from duty within 16
consecut
ive hours
• Use once every 7 consecutive days or after a
34-hour restart
• Does not apply if driver is eligible for § 395.1(e)(2)
non-CDL driver exception (see above)
§ 395.1(o)
State government 
operated
• All HOS regulations,
among others
• None
• Intrastate exceptions may be different. Check
with State enforcement for details.
§ 390.3T(f)(2)
--- page 17 ---
26
INTERSTATE TRUCK DRIVER’S GUIDE TO HOURS OF SERVICE FOR PROPERTY CARRIERS 
Category Type of Exception Conditions That Must Be Met 49 CFR Section
Tow truck 
responding to 
emergency
• All HOS
regulation
s,
among others
• W hen responding to government request for
wrecked/disabled vehicles
§ 390.23(a)(3)
Utility service 
vehicles
• Al
l HOS regulations • Vehicle being used to repair, maintain, or
deliver pu
blic utility services including electric,
gas, wat
er, sanitary sewer, telephone, television
cable, or co
mmunity antenna service
• Includes travel to and from activity sites
• Operates primarily within service area of
utility’
s subscribers or consumers
• Does not include new construction activity
§ 395.1(n)
§ 395.2

--- page 18 ---
27
INTERSTATE TRUCK DRIVER’S GUIDE TO HOURS OF SERVICE FOR PROPERTY CARRIERS 
INTERSTATE TRUCK DRIVER’S GUIDE TO HOURS OF SERVICE FOR PROPERTY CARRIERS 
Interstate Truck Driver’s Guide  
to Hours of Service
Contact Info: 
FMCSA Information Line,  
1-800-832-5660 or   
hoursofservice@dot.gov