
45 CFR Part 164 Subpart D - Notification in the Case of Breach of Unsecured Protected Health Information
========================================================================================================


§ 164.400 Applicability.
------------------------

The requirements of this subpart shall apply with respect to breaches of protected health
information occurring on or after September 23, 2009.


----------------------------------------------------------------------


§ 164.402 Definitions.
----------------------

As used in this subpart, the following terms have the following meanings:

Breach means the acquisition, access, use, or disclosure of protected health information in
a manner not permitted under subpart E of this part which compromises the security or
privacy of the protected health information.

(1) Breach excludes:

(i) Any unintentional acquisition, access, or use of protected health information by a
workforce member or person acting under the authority of a covered entity or a business
associate, if such acquisition, access, or use was made in good faith and within the scope
of authority and does not result in further use or disclosure in a manner not permitted
under subpart E of this part.

(ii) Any inadvertent disclosure by a person who is authorized to access protected health
information at a covered entity or business associate to another person authorized to access
protected health information at the same covered entity or business associate, or organized
health care arrangement in which the covered entity participates, and the information
received as a result of such disclosure is not further used or disclosed in a manner not
permitted under subpart E of this part.

(iii) A disclosure of protected health information where a covered entity or business
associate has a good faith belief that an unauthorized person to whom the disclosure was
made would not reasonably have been able to retain such information.

(2) Except as provided in paragraph (1) of this definition, an acquisition, access, use, or
disclosure of protected health information in a manner not permitted under subpart E is
presumed to be a breach unless the covered entity or business associate, as applicable,
demonstrates that there is a low probability that the protected health information has been
compromised based on a risk assessment of at least the following factors:

(i) The nature and extent of the protected health information involved, including the types
of identifiers and the likelihood of re-identification;

(ii) The unauthorized person who used the protected health information or to whom the
disclosure was made;

(iii) Whether the protected health information was actually acquired or viewed; and

(iv) The extent to which the risk to the protected health information has been mitigated.

Unsecured protected health information means protected health information that is not
rendered unusable, unreadable, or indecipherable to unauthorized persons through the use of
a technology or methodology specified by the Secretary in the guidance issued under section
13402(h)(2) of Public Law 111-5.


----------------------------------------------------------------------


§ 164.404 Notification to individuals.
--------------------------------------

(a) Standard—(1) General rule. A covered entity shall, following the discovery of a breach
of unsecured protected health information, notify each individual whose unsecured protected
health information has been, or is reasonably believed by the covered entity to have been,
accessed, acquired, used, or disclosed as a result of such breach.

(2) Breaches treated as discovered. For purposes of paragraph (a)(1) of this section, §§
164.406(a), and 164.408(a), a breach shall be treated as discovered by a covered entity as
of the first day on which such breach is known to the covered entity, or, by exercising
reasonable diligence would have been known to the covered entity. A covered entity shall be
deemed to have knowledge of a breach if such breach is known, or by exercising reasonable
diligence would have been known, to any person, other than the person committing the breach,
who is a workforce member or agent of the covered entity (determined in accordance with the
federal common law of agency).

(b) Implementation specification: Timeliness of notification. Except as provided in §
164.412, a covered entity shall provide the notification required by paragraph (a) of this
section without unreasonable delay and in no case later than 60 calendar days after
discovery of a breach.

(c) Implementation specifications: Content of notification—(1) Elements. The notification
required by paragraph (a) of this section shall include, to the extent possible:

(A) A brief description of what happened, including the date of the breach and the date of
the discovery of the breach, if known;

(B) A description of the types of unsecured protected health information that were involved
in the breach (such as whether full name, social security number, date of birth, home
address, account number, diagnosis, disability code, or other types of information were
involved);

(C) Any steps individuals should take to protect themselves from potential harm resulting
from the breach;

(D) A brief description of what the covered entity involved is doing to investigate the
breach, to mitigate harm to individuals, and to protect against any further breaches; and

(E) Contact procedures for individuals to ask questions or learn additional information,
which shall include a toll-free telephone number, an e-mail address, Web site, or postal
address.

(2) Plain language requirement. The notification required by paragraph (a) of this section
shall be written in plain language.

(d) Implementation specifications: Methods of individual notification. The notification
required by paragraph (a) of this section shall be provided in the following form:

(1) Written notice. (i) Written notification by first-class mail to the individual at the
last known address of the individual or, if the individual agrees to electronic notice and
such agreement has not been withdrawn, by electronic mail. The notification may be provided
in one or more mailings as information is available.

(ii) If the covered entity knows the individual is deceased and has the address of the next
of kin or personal representative of the individual (as specified under § 164.502(g)(4) of
subpart E), written notification by first-class mail to either the next of kin or personal
representative of the individual. The notification may be provided in one or more mailings
as information is available.

(2) Substitute notice. In the case in which there is insufficient or out-of-date contact
information that precludes written notification to the individual under paragraph (d)(1)(i)
of this section, a substitute form of notice reasonably calculated to reach the individual
shall be provided. Substitute notice need not be provided in the case in which there is
insufficient or out-of-date contact information that precludes written notification to the
next of kin or personal representative of the individual under paragraph (d)(1)(ii).

(i) In the case in which there is insufficient or out-of-date contact information for fewer
than 10 individuals, then such substitute notice may be provided by an alternative form of
written notice, telephone, or other means.

(ii) In the case in which there is insufficient or out-of-date contact information for 10 or
more individuals, then such substitute notice shall:

(A) Be in the form of either a conspicuous posting for a period of 90 days on the home page
of the Web site of the covered entity involved, or conspicuous notice in major print or
broadcast media in geographic areas where the individuals affected by the breach likely
reside; and

(B) Include a toll-free phone number that remains active for at least 90 days where an
individual can learn whether the individual's unsecured protected health information may be
included in the breach.

(3) Additional notice in urgent situations. In any case deemed by the covered entity to
require urgency because of possible imminent misuse of unsecured protected health
information, the covered entity may provide information to individuals by telephone or other
means, as appropriate, in addition to notice provided under paragraph (d)(1) of this
section.


----------------------------------------------------------------------


§ 164.406 Notification to the media.
------------------------------------

(a) Standard. For a breach of unsecured protected health information involving more than 500
residents of a State or jurisdiction, a covered entity shall, following the discovery of the
breach as provided in § 164.404(a)(2), notify prominent media outlets serving the State or
jurisdiction.

(b) Implementation specification: Timeliness of notification. Except as provided in §
164.412, a covered entity shall provide the notification required by paragraph (a) of this
section without unreasonable delay and in no case later than 60 calendar days after
discovery of a breach.

(c) Implementation specifications: Content of notification. The notification required by
paragraph (a) of this section shall meet the requirements of § 164.404(c).


----------------------------------------------------------------------


§ 164.408 Notification to the Secretary.
----------------------------------------

(a) Standard. A covered entity shall, following the discovery of a breach of unsecured
protected health information as provided in § 164.404(a)(2), notify the Secretary.

(b) Implementation specifications: Breaches involving 500 or more individuals. For breaches
of unsecured protected health information involving 500 or more individuals, a covered
entity shall, except as provided in § 164.412, provide the notification required by
paragraph (a) of this section contemporaneously with the notice required by § 164.404(a) and
in the manner specified on the HHS Web site.

(c) Implementation specifications: Breaches involving less than 500 individuals. For
breaches of unsecured protected health information involving less than 500 individuals, a
covered entity shall maintain a log or other documentation of such breaches and, not later
than 60 days after the end of each calendar year, provide the notification required by
paragraph (a) of this section for breaches discovered during the preceding calendar year, in
the manner specified on the HHS web site.


----------------------------------------------------------------------


§ 164.410 Notification by a business associate.
-----------------------------------------------

(a) Standard—(1) General rule. A business associate shall, following the discovery of a
breach of unsecured protected health information, notify the covered entity of such breach.

(2) Breaches treated as discovered. For purposes of paragraph (a)(1) of this section, a
breach shall be treated as discovered by a business associate as of the first day on which
such breach is known to the business associate or, by exercising reasonable diligence, would
have been known to the business associate. A business associate shall be deemed to have
knowledge of a breach if the breach is known, or by exercising reasonable diligence would
have been known, to any person, other than the person committing the breach, who is an
employee, officer, or other agent of the business associate (determined in accordance with
the Federal common law of agency).

(b) Implementation specifications: Timeliness of notification. Except as provided in §
164.412, a business associate shall provide the notification required by paragraph (a) of
this section without unreasonable delay and in no case later than 60 calendar days after
discovery of a breach.

(c) Implementation specifications: Content of notification. (1) The notification required by
paragraph (a) of this section shall include, to the extent possible, the identification of
each individual whose unsecured protected health information has been, or is reasonably
believed by the business associate to have been, accessed, acquired, used, or disclosed
during the breach.

(2) A business associate shall provide the covered entity with any other available
information that the covered entity is required to include in notification to the individual
under § 164.404(c) at the time of the notification required by paragraph (a) of this section
or promptly thereafter as information becomes available.


----------------------------------------------------------------------


§ 164.412 Law enforcement delay.
--------------------------------

If a law enforcement official states to a covered entity or business associate that a
notification, notice, or posting required under this subpart would impede a criminal
investigation or cause damage to national security, a covered entity or business associate
shall:

(a) If the statement is in writing and specifies the time for which a delay is required,
delay such notification, notice, or posting for the time period specified by the official;
or

(b) If the statement is made orally, document the statement, including the identity of the
official making the statement, and delay the notification, notice, or posting temporarily
and no longer than 30 days from the date of the oral statement, unless a written statement
as described in paragraph (a) of this section is submitted during that time.


----------------------------------------------------------------------


§ 164.414 Administrative requirements and burden of proof.
----------------------------------------------------------

(a) Administrative requirements. A covered entity is required to comply with the
administrative requirements of § 164.530(b), (d), (e), (g), (h), (i), and (j) with respect
to the requirements of this subpart.

(b) Burden of proof. In the event of a use or disclosure in violation of subpart E, the
covered entity or business associate, as applicable, shall have the burden of demonstrating
that all notifications were made as required by this subpart or that the use or disclosure
did not constitute a breach, as defined at § 164.402.


----------------------------------------------------------------------


§ 164.514 Other requirements relating to uses and disclosures of protected health information.
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------

(a) Standard: De-identification of protected health information. Health information that
does not identify an individual and with respect to which there is no reasonable basis to
believe that the information can be used to identify an individual is not individually
identifiable health information.

(b) Implementation specifications: Requirements for de-identification of protected health
information. A covered entity may determine that health information is not individually
identifiable health information only if:

(1) A person with appropriate knowledge of and experience with generally accepted
statistical and scientific principles and methods for rendering information not individually
identifiable:

(i) Applying such principles and methods, determines that the risk is very small that the
information could be used, alone or in combination with other reasonably available
information, by an anticipated recipient to identify an individual who is a subject of the
information; and

(ii) Documents the methods and results of the analysis that justify such determination; or

(2)(i) The following identifiers of the individual or of relatives, employers, or household
members of the individual, are removed:

(A) Names;

(B) All geographic subdivisions smaller than a State, including street address, city,
county, precinct, zip code, and their equivalent geocodes, except for the initial three
digits of a zip code if, according to the current publicly available data from the Bureau of
the Census:

(1) The geographic unit formed by combining all zip codes with the same three initial digits
contains more than 20,000 people; and

(2) The initial three digits of a zip code for all such geographic units containing 20,000
or fewer people is changed to 000.

(C) All elements of dates (except year) for dates directly related to an individual,
including birth date, admission date, discharge date, date of death; and all ages over 89
and all elements of dates (including year) indicative of such age, except that such ages and
elements may be aggregated into a single category of age 90 or older;

(D) Telephone numbers;

(E) Fax numbers;

(F) Electronic mail addresses;

(G) Social security numbers;

(H) Medical record numbers;

(I) Health plan beneficiary numbers;

(J) Account numbers;

(K) Certificate/license numbers;

(L) Vehicle identifiers and serial numbers, including license plate numbers;

(M) Device identifiers and serial numbers;

(N) Web Universal Resource Locators (URLs);

(O) Internet Protocol (IP) address numbers;

(P) Biometric identifiers, including finger and voice prints;

(Q) Full face photographic images and any comparable images; and

(R) Any other unique identifying number, characteristic, or code, except as permitted by
paragraph (c) of this section; and

(ii) The covered entity does not have actual knowledge that the information could be used
alone or in combination with other information to identify an individual who is a subject of
the information.

(c) Implementation specifications: Re-identification. A covered entity may assign a code or
other means of record identification to allow information de-identified under this section
to be re-identified by the covered entity, provided that:

(1) Derivation. The code or other means of record identification is not derived from or
related to information about the individual and is not otherwise capable of being translated
so as to identify the individual; and

(2) Security. The covered entity does not use or disclose the code or other means of record
identification for any other purpose, and does not disclose the mechanism for re-
identification.

(d)(1) Standard: minimum necessary requirements. In order to comply with § 164.502(b) and
this section, a covered entity must meet the requirements of paragraphs (d)(2) through
(d)(5) of this section with respect to a request for, or the use and disclosure of,
protected health information.

(2) Implementation specifications: Minimum necessary uses of protected health information.
(i) A covered entity must identify:

(A) Those persons or classes of persons, as appropriate, in its workforce who need access to
protected health information to carry out their duties; and

(B) For each such person or class of persons, the category or categories of protected health
information to which access is needed and any conditions appropriate to such access.

(ii) A covered entity must make reasonable efforts to limit the access of such persons or
classes identified in paragraph (d)(2)(i)(A) of this section to protected health information
consistent with paragraph (d)(2)(i)(B) of this section.

(3) Implementation specification: Minimum necessary disclosures of protected health
information. (i) For any type of disclosure that it makes on a routine and recurring basis,
a covered entity must implement policies and procedures (which may be standard protocols)
that limit the protected health information disclosed to the amount reasonably necessary to
achieve the purpose of the disclosure.

(ii) For all other disclosures, a covered entity must:

(A) Develop criteria designed to limit the protected health information disclosed to the
information reasonably necessary to accomplish the purpose for which disclosure is sought;
and

(B) Review requests for disclosure on an individual basis in accordance with such criteria.

(iii) A covered entity may rely, if such reliance is reasonable under the circumstances, on
a requested disclosure as the minimum necessary for the stated purpose when:

(A) Making disclosures to public officials that are permitted under § 164.512, if the public
official represents that the information requested is the minimum necessary for the stated
purpose(s);

(B) The information is requested by another covered entity;

(C) The information is requested by a professional who is a member of its workforce or is a
business associate of the covered entity for the purpose of providing professional services
to the covered entity, if the professional represents that the information requested is the
minimum necessary for the stated purpose(s); or

(D) Documentation or representations that comply with the applicable requirements of §
164.512(i) have been provided by a person requesting the information for research purposes.

(4) Implementation specifications: Minimum necessary requests for protected health
information. (i) A covered entity must limit any request for protected health information to
that which is reasonably necessary to accomplish the purpose for which the request is made,
when requesting such information from other covered entities.

(ii) For a request that is made on a routine and recurring basis, a covered entity must
implement policies and procedures (which may be standard protocols) that limit the protected
health information requested to the amount reasonably necessary to accomplish the purpose
for which the request is made.

(iii) For all other requests, a covered entity must:

(A) Develop criteria designed to limit the request for protected health information to the
information reasonably necessary to accomplish the purpose for which the request is made;
and

(B) Review requests for disclosure on an individual basis in accordance with such criteria.

(5) Implementation specification: Other content requirement. For all uses, disclosures, or
requests to which the requirements in paragraph (d) of this section apply, a covered entity
may not use, disclose or request an entire medical record, except when the entire medical
record is specifically justified as the amount that is reasonably necessary to accomplish
the purpose of the use, disclosure, or request.

(e)(1) Standard: Limited data set. A covered entity may use or disclose a limited data set
that meets the requirements of paragraphs (e)(2) and (e)(3) of this section, if the covered
entity enters into a data use agreement with the limited data set recipient, in accordance
with paragraph (e)(4) of this section.

(2) Implementation specification: Limited data set: A limited data set is protected health
information that excludes the following direct identifiers of the individual or of
relatives, employers, or household members of the individual:

(i) Names;

(ii) Postal address information, other than town or city, State, and zip code;

(iii) Telephone numbers;

(iv) Fax numbers;

(v) Electronic mail addresses;

(vi) Social security numbers;

(vii) Medical record numbers;

(viii) Health plan beneficiary numbers;

(ix) Account numbers;

(x) Certificate/license numbers;

(xi) Vehicle identifiers and serial numbers, including license plate numbers;

(xii) Device identifiers and serial numbers;

(xiii) Web Universal Resource Locators (URLs);

(xiv) Internet Protocol (IP) address numbers;

(xv) Biometric identifiers, including finger and voice prints; and

(xvi) Full face photographic images and any comparable images.

(3) Implementation specification: Permitted purposes for uses and disclosures. (i) A covered
entity may use or disclose a limited data set under paragraph (e)(1) of this section only
for the purposes of research, public health, or health care operations.

(ii) A covered entity may use protected health information to create a limited data set that
meets the requirements of paragraph (e)(2) of this section, or disclose protected health
information only to a business associate for such purpose, whether or not the limited data
set is to be used by the covered entity.

(4) Implementation specifications: Data use agreement—(i) Agreement required. A covered
entity may use or disclose a limited data set under paragraph (e)(1) of this section only if
the covered entity obtains satisfactory assurance, in the form of a data use agreement that
meets the requirements of this section, that the limited data set recipient will only use or
disclose the protected health information for limited purposes.

(ii) Contents. A data use agreement between the covered entity and the limited data set
recipient must:

(A) Establish the permitted uses and disclosures of such information by the limited data set
recipient, consistent with paragraph (e)(3) of this section. The data use agreement may not
authorize the limited data set recipient to use or further disclose the information in a
manner that would violate the requirements of this subpart, if done by the covered entity;

(B) Establish who is permitted to use or receive the limited data set; and

(C) Provide that the limited data set recipient will:

(1) Not use or further disclose the information other than as permitted by the data use
agreement or as otherwise required by law;

(2) Use appropriate safeguards to prevent use or disclosure of the information other than as
provided for by the data use agreement;

(3) Report to the covered entity any use or disclosure of the information not provided for
by its data use agreement of which it becomes aware;

(4) Ensure that any agents to whom it provides the limited data set agree to the same
restrictions and conditions that apply to the limited data set recipient with respect to
such information; and

(5) Not identify the information or contact the individuals.

(iii) Compliance. (A) A covered entity is not in compliance with the standards in paragraph
(e) of this section if the covered entity knew of a pattern of activity or practice of the
limited data set recipient that constituted a material breach or violation of the data use
agreement, unless the covered entity took reasonable steps to cure the breach or end the
violation, as applicable, and, if such steps were unsuccessful:

(1) Discontinued disclosure of protected health information to the recipient; and

(2) Reported the problem to the Secretary.

(B) A covered entity that is a limited data set recipient and violates a data use agreement
will be in noncompliance with the standards, implementation specifications, and requirements
of paragraph (e) of this section.

(f) Fundraising communications—(1) Standard: Uses and disclosures for fundraising. Subject
to the conditions of paragraph (f)(2) of this section, a covered entity may use, or disclose
to a business associate or to an institutionally related foundation, the following protected
health information for the purpose of raising funds for its own benefit, without an
authorization meeting the requirements of § 164.508:

(i) Demographic information relating to an individual, including name, address, other
contact information, age, gender, and date of birth;

(ii) Dates of health care provided to an individual;

(iii) Department of service information;

(iv) Treating physician;

(v) Outcome information; and

(vi) Health insurance status.

(2) Implementation specifications: Fundraising requirements. (i) A covered entity may not
use or disclose protected health information for fundraising purposes as otherwise permitted
by paragraph (f)(1) of this section unless a statement required by § 164.520(b)(1)(iii)(A)
is included in the covered entity's notice of privacy practices.

(ii) With each fundraising communication made to an individual under this paragraph, a
covered entity must provide the individual with a clear and conspicuous opportunity to elect
not to receive any further fundraising communications. The method for an individual to elect
not to receive further fundraising communications may not cause the individual to incur an
undue burden or more than a nominal cost.

(iii) A covered entity may not condition treatment or payment on the individual's choice
with respect to the receipt of fundraising communications.

(iv) A covered entity may not make fundraising communications to an individual under this
paragraph where the individual has elected not to receive such communications under
paragraph (f)(2)(ii) of this section.

(v) A covered entity may provide an individual who has elected not to receive further
fundraising communications with a method to opt back in to receive such communications.

(g) Standard: Uses and disclosures for underwriting and related purposes. If a health plan
receives protected health information for the purpose of underwriting, premium rating, or
other activities relating to the creation, renewal, or replacement of a contract of health
insurance or health benefits, and if such health insurance or health benefits are not placed
with the health plan, such health plan may only use or disclose such protected health
information for such purpose or as may be required by law, subject to the prohibition at §
164.502(a)(5)(i) with respect to genetic information included in the protected health
information.

(h)(1) Standard: Verification requirements. Prior to any disclosure permitted by this
subpart, a covered entity must:

(i) Except with respect to disclosures under § 164.510, verify the identity of a person
requesting protected health information and the authority of any such person to have access
to protected health information under this subpart, if the identity or any such authority of
such person is not known to the covered entity; and

(ii) Obtain any documentation, statements, or representations, whether oral or written, from
the person requesting the protected health information when such documentation, statement,
or representation is a condition of the disclosure under this subpart.

(2) Implementation specifications: Verification—(i) Conditions on disclosures. If a
disclosure is conditioned by this subpart on particular documentation, statements, or
representations from the person requesting the protected health information, a covered
entity may rely, if such reliance is reasonable under the circumstances, on documentation,
statements, or representations that, on their face, meet the applicable requirements.

(A) The conditions in § 164.512(f)(1)(ii)(C) may be satisfied by the administrative subpoena
or similar process or by a separate written statement that, on its face, demonstrates that
the applicable requirements have been met.

(B) The documentation required by § 164.512(i)(2) may be satisfied by one or more written
statements, provided that each is appropriately dated and signed in accordance with §
164.512(i)(2)(i) and (v).

(ii) Identity of public officials. A covered entity may rely, if such reliance is reasonable
under the circumstances, on any of the following to verify identity when the disclosure of
protected health information is to a public official or a person acting on behalf of the
public official:

(A) If the request is made in person, presentation of an agency identification badge, other
official credentials, or other proof of government status;

(B) If the request is in writing, the request is on the appropriate government letterhead;
or

(C) If the disclosure is to a person acting on behalf of a public official, a written
statement on appropriate government letterhead that the person is acting under the
government's authority or other evidence or documentation of agency, such as a contract for
services, memorandum of understanding, or purchase order, that establishes that the person
is acting on behalf of the public official.

(iii) Authority of public officials. A covered entity may rely, if such reliance is
reasonable under the circumstances, on any of the following to verify authority when the
disclosure of protected health information is to a public official or a person acting on
behalf of the public official:

(A) A written statement of the legal authority under which the information is requested, or,
if a written statement would be impracticable, an oral statement of such legal authority;

(B) If a request is made pursuant to legal process, warrant, subpoena, order, or other legal
process issued by a grand jury or a judicial or administrative tribunal is presumed to
constitute legal authority.

(iv) Exercise of professional judgment. The verification requirements of this paragraph are
met if the covered entity relies on the exercise of professional judgment in making a use or
disclosure in accordance with § 164.510 or acts on a good faith belief in making a
disclosure in accordance with § 164.512(j).
