
--- page 1 ---
5639 Federal Register / Vol. 78, No. 17 / Friday, January 25, 2013 / Rules and Regulations 
information at or by a business associate 
of a covered entity, the Act requires the 
business associate to notify the covered 
entity of the breach. Finally, the Act 
requires the Secretary to post on an HHS 
Web site a list of covered entities that 
experience breaches of unsecured 
protected health information involving 
more than 500 individuals. 
Section 13400(1) of the Act defines 
‘‘breach’’ to mean, generally, the 
unauthorized acquisition, access, use, or 
disclosure of protected health 
information which compromises the 
security or privacy of such information. 
The Act includes three exceptions to 
this definition to encompass situations 
Congress clearly intended not to 
constitute breaches: (1) Unintentional 
acquisition, access, or use of protected 
health information by an employee or 
other person acting under the authority 
of a covered entity or business associate 
if such acquisition, access, or use was 
made in good faith and within the 
course and scope of the employment or 
other professional relationship of such 
person with the covered entity or 
business associate and such information 
is not further acquired, accessed, used, 
or disclosed by any person (section 
13400(1)(B)(i)); (2) inadvertent 
disclosure of protected health 
information from one person authorized 
to access protected health information at 
a facility operated by a covered entity or 
business associate to another person 
similarly situated at the same facility 
and the information received is not 
further acquired, accessed, used or 
disclosed without authorization by any 
person (section 13400(1)(B)(ii) and (iii)); 
and (3) unauthorized disclosures in 
which an unauthorized person to whom 
protected health information is 
disclosed would not reasonably have 
been able to retain the information 
(section 13400(1)(A)). 
Further, section 13402(h) of the Act 
defines ‘‘unsecured protected health 
information’’ as ‘‘protected health 
information that is not secured through 
the use of a technology or methodology 
specified by the Secretary in guidance’’ 
and provides that the guidance specify 
the technologies and methodologies that 
render protected health information 
unusable, unreadable, or indecipherable 
to unauthorized individuals. Covered 
entities and business associates that 
implement the specified technologies 
and methodologies with respect to 
protected health information are not 
required to provide notifications in the 
event of a breach of such information— 
that is, the information is not 
considered ‘‘unsecured’’ in such cases. 
As required by the Act, the Secretary 
initially issued this guidance on April 
17, 2009 (it was subsequently published 
at 74 FR 19006 on April 27, 2009). The 
guidance listed and described 
encryption and destruction as the two 
technologies and methodologies for 
rendering protected health information 
unusable, unreadable, or indecipherable 
to unauthorized individuals. 
In cases in which notification is 
required, the Act at section 13402 
prescribes the timeliness, content, and 
methods of providing the breach 
notifications. 
Section 13402 required HHS to issue 
within 180 days of enactment interim 
final regulations to implement these 
breach notification requirements. The 
Department issued an interim final rule 
on August 24, 2009, with a 60-day 
public comment period (74 FR 42740). 
The interim final rule became effective 
on September 23, 2009. In the preamble 
to the interim final rule, the Department 
also re-issued without substantive 
change its Guidance Specifying the 
Technologies and Methodologies That 
Render Protected Health Information 
Unusable, Unreadable, or 
Indecipherable to Unauthorized 
Individuals that was initially issued on 
April 17, 2009. The Guidance continues 
to specify encryption and destruction as 
the two methods for rendering protected 
health information unusable, 
unreadable, or indecipherable to 
unauthorized individuals—or 
‘‘secured’’—and thus, exempt from the 
breach notification obligations. See 74 
FR 42741–43. 
B. Overview of the Interim Final Rule 
The interim final rule added a new 
subpart D to part 164 of title 45 of the 
Code of Federal Regulations (CFR) to 
implement the breach notification 
provisions of section 13402 of the 
HITECH Act. In developing the interim 
final rule, the Department consulted 
closely with the Federal Trade 
Commission (FTC), which administers 
similar breach notification requirements 
on vendors of personal health records 
(PHRs) and their third party service 
providers under section 13407 of the 
HITECH Act. The interim final rule and 
FTC’s Health Breach Notification Rule 
(74 FR 42962, published August 25, 
2009) made clear that entities operating 
as HIPAA covered entities and business 
associates are subject to HHS’, and not 
the FTC’s, breach notification rule. 
Second, to address those limited cases 
where an entity may be subject to both 
HHS’ and the FTC’s rules, such as a 
vendor that offers PHRs to customers of 
a HIPAA covered entity as a business 
associate and also offers PHRs directly 
to the public, both sets of regulations 
were harmonized by including the same 
or similar language, within the 
constraints of the statutory language. 
The 60-day public comment period on 
the interim final rule closed on October 
23, 2009. The Department received 
approximately 120 comments during the 
comment period from a variety of 
entities, including health care providers, 
hospital and medical associations, 
health plans, educational institutions, 
information technology companies, 
privacy and security advocates, 
consumer groups, state agencies, and 
several members of Congress. The 
provisions of the interim final rule are 
discussed in more detail below, along 
with the public comments received, and 
the provisions of this final rule. 
C. Section-by-Section Description of 
Final Rule and Response to Comments 
1. Section 164.402—Definitions 
a. Definition of ‘‘Breach’’ 
Interim Final Rule 
Section 13400(1)(A) of the Act defines 
‘‘breach’’ as the ‘‘unauthorized 
acquisition, access, use, or disclosure of 
protected health information which 
compromises the security or privacy of 
such information, except where an 
unauthorized person to whom such 
information is disclosed would not 
reasonably have been able to retain such 
information.’’ Section 13400(1)(B) of the 
Act provides two additional exceptions 
to the definition of ‘‘breach.’’ The 
interim final rule at 45 CFR 164.402 
defined a ‘‘breach’’ to mean generally 
‘‘the acquisition, access, use, or 
disclosure of protected health 
information in a manner not permitted 
[by the Privacy Rule] which 
compromises the security or privacy of 
the protected health information.’’ The 
definition included the statutory 
exceptions to the definition (discussed 
below) and clarified that 
‘‘unauthorized’’ for purposes of the 
statute meant in a manner not permitted 
by the Privacy Rule. 
In addition, for purposes of this 
definition, the rule provided that 
‘‘compromises the security or privacy of 
the protected health information’’ 
means poses a significant risk of 
financial, reputational, or other harm to 
the individual. The Department 
included this standard regarding a 
significant risk of harm to the individual 
(i.e., harm standard) after considering 
public comment received in response to 
the Department’s request for 
information on the HITECH Act’s breach 
notification provisions. See 74 FR 
19006. The inclusion of the harm 
standard was intended to align the 
Department’s rule with many State 
VerDate Mar<15>2010 18:57 Jan 24, 2013 Jkt 229001 PO 00000 Frm 00075 Fmt 4701 Sfmt 4700 E:\FR\FM\25JAR2.SGM 25JAR2sroberts on DSK5SPTVN1PROD with 
--- page 2 ---
5640 Federal Register / Vol. 78, No. 17 / Friday, January 25, 2013 / Rules and Regulations 
breach notification laws, as well as 
existing obligations on Federal agencies 
pursuant to OMB Memorandum M–07– 
16, that have similar standards for 
triggering breach notification. In 
addition, the standard was intended to 
ensure that consumers were not flooded 
with breach notifications for 
inconsequential events, which could 
cause unnecessary anxiety and eventual 
apathy among consumers. 
To determine whether an 
impermissible use or disclosure of 
protected health information constitutes 
a breach under this standard, covered 
entities and business associates were 
required to perform a risk assessment to 
determine if there is a significant risk of 
harm to the individual as a result of the 
impermissible use or disclosure. In 
conducting the risk assessment, covered 
entities and business associates were to 
consider a number or combination of 
factors, including who impermissibly 
used the information or to whom the 
information was impermissibly 
disclosed; whether the covered entity or 
business associate had taken steps to 
mitigate or eliminate the risk of harm; 
whether the protected health 
information was actually accessed; and 
what type or amount of protected health 
information was impermissibly used or 
disclosed. 
The rule provided further that an 
impermissible use or disclosure of 
protected health information that 
qualifies as a limited data set but also 
excludes dates of birth and zip codes 
(both identifiers that may otherwise be 
included in a limited data set) does not 
compromise the security or privacy of 
the protected health information. The 
Department included this narrow 
exception in the belief that it would be 
very difficult to re-identify a limited 
data set that excludes dates of birth and 
zip codes. Thus, a breach of such 
information would pose a low level of 
risk of harm to an individual. 
The interim final rule also included 
the three statutory exceptions to the 
definition of breach. To implement 
section 13400(1)(B)(i) of the Act, the 
first regulatory exception provided that 
a breach excludes any unintentional 
acquisition, access, or use of protected 
health information by a workforce 
member or person acting under the 
authority of a covered entity or business 
associate, if such acquisition, access, or 
use was made in good faith and within 
the scope of authority and does not 
result in further use or disclosure in a 
manner not permitted by the Privacy 
Rule. We substituted the term 
‘‘workforce members’’ for the statutory 
term ‘‘employees’’ because ‘‘workforce 
member’’ is a defined term for purposes 
of the HIPAA Rules and means 
employees, volunteers, trainees, and 
other persons whose conduct, in the 
performance of work for a covered 
entity or business associate, is under the 
direct control of such covered entity or 
business associate. 
In addition to unintentional, good 
faith access to protected health 
information by workforce members, this 
exception covers similar access by a 
business associate of a covered entity or 
subcontractor with respect to a business 
associate or other person acting on 
behalf of a covered entity or business 
associate. The exception does not, 
however, cover situations involving 
snooping employees, because access as 
a result of such snooping would be 
neither unintentional nor done in good 
faith. 
To implement section 13400(1)(B)(ii) 
and (iii) of the Act, the second 
regulatory exception provided that a 
breach excludes inadvertent disclosures 
of protected health information from a 
person who is authorized to access 
protected health information at a 
covered entity or business associate to 
another person authorized to access 
protected health information at the same 
covered entity, business associate, or 
organized health care arrangement in 
which the covered entity participates. 
The regulatory exception includes 
reference to an ‘‘organized health care 
arrangement’’ to capture, among other 
things, clinically integrated care settings 
in which individuals typically receive 
health care from more than one health 
care provider, such as a hospital, and 
the health care providers who have staff 
privileges at the hospital. 
In this regulatory exception, we also 
interpreted the statutory limitations that 
the disclosure be to ‘‘another person 
similarly situated at the same facility’’ 
to mean that the disclosure be to 
another person authorized to access 
protected health information (even if the 
two persons may not be authorized to 
access the same types of protected 
health information) at the same covered 
entity, business associate, or organized 
health care arrangement in which the 
covered entity participates (even if the 
covered entity, business associate, or 
organized health care arrangement has 
multiple facilities or locations across the 
country). 
Finally, to implement section 
13400(1)(A) of the Act, the interim final 
rule exempted disclosures of protected 
health information where a covered 
entity or a business associate has a good 
faith belief that an unauthorized person 
to whom the disclosure was made 
would not reasonably have been able to 
retain such information. For example, if 
a covered entity, due to a lack of 
reasonable safeguards, sends a number 
of explanations of benefits (EOBs) to the 
wrong individuals and a few of the 
EOBs are returned by the post office, 
unopened, as undeliverable, the covered 
entity can conclude that the improper 
addressees could not reasonably have 
retained the information. The EOBs that 
were not returned as undeliverable, 
however, and that the covered entity 
knows were sent to the wrong 
individuals, should be treated as 
potential breaches. As another example, 
if a nurse mistakenly hands a patient the 
discharge papers belonging to another 
patient, but she quickly realizes her 
mistake and recovers the protected 
health information from the patient, this 
would not constitute a breach if the 
nurse can reasonably conclude that the 
patient could not have read or otherwise 
retained the information. 
With respect to any of the three 
exceptions discussed above, a covered 
entity or business associate has the 
burden of proof, pursuant to 
§ 164.414(b) (discussed below), for 
showing why breach notification was 
not required. Accordingly, the covered 
entity or business associate must 
document why the impermissible use or 
disclosure falls under one of the above 
exceptions. 
Overview of Public Comments 
Of the approximately 85 public 
comments received on the interim final 
rule addressing the definition of breach, 
approximately 70 of those comments 
addressed the harm standard and risk 
assessment approach in the interim final 
rule. We received approximately 60 
comments in support of the harm 
standard and the risk assessment 
approach. The commenters in support 
of this approach included providers, 
health plans, professional associations, 
and certain members of Congress. These 
commenters argued that the inclusion of 
the harm standard and accompanying 
risk assessment was consistent with the 
statutory language, aligned the interim 
final rule with many State breach 
notification laws and Federal policies, 
and appropriately placed the obligation 
to determine if a breach had occurred on 
covered entities and business associates 
since they had the requisite knowledge 
of the incident to best assess the likely 
impact of the impermissible use or 
disclosure. 
The proponents of the harm standard 
and risk assessment approach also 
argued that its removal would increase 
the cost and burden of implementing 
the rule for covered entities, business 
associates, as well as HHS, and may 
cause unnecessary anxiety and eventual 
VerDate Mar<15>2010 18:57 Jan 24, 2013 Jkt 229001 PO 00000 Frm 00076 Fmt 4701 Sfmt 4700 E:\FR\FM\25JAR2.SGM 25JAR2sroberts on DSK5SPTVN1PROD with 
--- page 3 ---
5641 Federal Register / Vol. 78, No. 17 / Friday, January 25, 2013 / Rules and Regulations 
apathy among consumers if notifications 
are sent when there is no risk of harm 
to the individual. 
We also received approximately 10 
comments opposed to the harm 
standard. Generally, the commenters 
opposed to this approach were members 
of Congress and consumer advocacy 
groups. Some opponents of the harm 
standard argued that its addition to the 
interim final rule set too high a bar for 
triggering breach notification, which 
was contrary to statutory intent. These 
commenters argued that the final rule 
should adopt a bright line standard for 
breach notification to ensure that 
individuals are aware of all 
impermissible uses and disclosures of 
their health information regardless of 
the potential risk and to make 
implementation and enforcement of the 
rule more uniform by removing the 
discretion and judgment given to 
covered entities in the interim final rule. 
These commenters argued that such 
transparency would better breed 
consumer trust and would allow 
individuals to assess the risk of harm 
themselves and take necessary measures 
to mitigate an impermissible use or 
disclosure of their health information. 
Other commenters, while opposed to 
a harm standard to trigger breach 
notification, nonetheless agreed that 
breach notification should not be 
required following every impermissible 
use or disclosure of unsecured protected 
health information no matter how 
inconsequential the breach. These 
commenters argued that, rather than a 
subjective standard measuring the risk 
of harm to an individual, the final rule 
should include a more objective 
standard against which entities would 
be required to assess risk. These 
commenters suggested that the risk 
assessment should focus on the risk that 
the protected health information was 
compromised instead of on the risk of 
harm to the individual. Additionally, 
these commenters proposed four factors 
that should be considered to determine 
whether the information was 
compromised: (1) To whom the 
information was impermissibly 
disclosed; (2) whether the information 
was actually accessed or viewed; (3) the 
potential ability of the recipient to 
identify the subjects of the data; and (4) 
in cases where the recipient is the 
disclosing covered entity’s business 
associate or is another covered entity, 
whether the recipient took appropriate 
mitigating action. 
Some commenters stated that the 
default function of the rule was unclear. 
In particular, these commenters 
questioned whether the rule required 
notification of a breach unless it is 
determined that a significant risk of 
harm does not exist, or alternatively, 
required notification only in cases 
where significant risk of harm can be 
demonstrated. Other commenters 
suggested that we include in the 
definition an express presumption of a 
breach unless an entity can show 
otherwise. 
Additionally, many commenters 
responded to the treatment of limited 
data sets in the interim final rule. 
Although many commenters expressed 
support for the assertion that limited 
data sets that do not contain dates of 
birth and zip codes do not compromise 
the security or privacy of protected 
health information, most of these 
commenters expressed concern that the 
interim final rule did not go far enough 
and should exempt even those limited 
data sets that contain dates of birth and/ 
or zip codes from the breach notification 
requirements. These commenters argued 
that no impermissible use or disclosure 
of a limited data set should trigger 
breach notification obligations because 
without the 16 direct identifiers that the 
Privacy Rule requires to be stripped 
from the information, there is minimal 
risk of harm to the individual. 
Additionally, commenters indicated it 
would be costly and burdensome for 
entities to have to re-identify the 
information in a limited data set to 
provide notification and that re- 
identifying the information could also 
pose an additional risk of harm to the 
affected individuals. Finally, other 
commenters noted that because 
researchers commonly rely on limited 
data sets that contain dates of birth and 
zip codes, researchers would not be able 
to take advantage of the exception for 
certain limited data sets in the interim 
final rule, which may have the effect of 
deterring research. 
In contrast, some commenters 
expressed concern regarding the 
inclusion of even the limited exception 
to the definition of breach for limited 
data sets that do not include dates of 
birth and zip codes. These commenters 
supported requiring entities to perform 
a risk assessment to determine whether 
an impermissible use or disclosure of 
such information compromised the 
security or privacy of the information, 
as there may be a risk of re- 
identification of this information 
depending on who received the 
information. 
Final Rule 
After considering the public 
comments on the definition, the 
Department in this final rule amends the 
definition of ‘‘breach’’ at 45 CFR 
164.402. Based on the comments, we 
recognize that the language used in the 
interim final rule and its preamble 
could be construed and implemented in 
manners we had not intended. 
Accordingly, this final rule modifies 
and clarifies the definition of breach 
and the risk assessment approach 
outlined in the interim final rule. 
First, we have added language to the 
definition of breach to clarify that an 
impermissible use or disclosure of 
protected health information is 
presumed to be a breach unless the 
covered entity or business associate, as 
applicable, demonstrates that there is a 
low probability that the protected health 
information has been compromised. We 
recognize that some persons may have 
interpreted the risk of harm standard in 
the interim final rule as setting a much 
higher threshold for breach notification 
than we intended to set. As a result, we 
have clarified our position that breach 
notification is necessary in all situations 
except those in which the covered entity 
or business associate, as applicable, 
demonstrates that there is a low 
probability that the protected health 
information has been compromised (or 
one of the other exceptions to the 
definition of breach applies). We believe 
that the express statement of this 
presumption in the final rule will help 
ensure that all covered entities and 
business associates interpret and apply 
the regulation in a uniform manner and 
also responds to commenters that 
indicated the default function of the 
rule was unclear. This new language is 
also consistent with § 164.414, which 
provides that covered entities and 
business associates have the burden of 
proof to demonstrate that all 
notifications were provided or that an 
impermissible use or disclosure did not 
constitute a breach (such as by 
demonstrating through a risk assessment 
that there was a low probability that the 
protected health information had been 
compromised) and must maintain 
documentation sufficient to meet that 
burden of proof. 
Second, to further ensure that this 
provision is applied uniformly and 
objectively by covered entities and 
business associates, we have removed 
the harm standard and modified the risk 
assessment to focus more objectively on 
the risk that the protected health 
information has been compromised. 
Thus, breach notification is not required 
under the final rule if a covered entity 
or business associate, as applicable, 
demonstrates through a risk assessment 
that there is a low probability that the 
protected health information has been 
compromised, rather than demonstrate 
that there is no significant risk of harm 
to the individual as was provided under 
VerDate Mar<15>2010 18:57 Jan 24, 2013 Jkt 229001 PO 00000 Frm 00077 Fmt 4701 Sfmt 4700 E:\FR\FM\25JAR2.SGM 25JAR2sroberts on DSK5SPTVN1PROD with 
--- page 4 ---
5642 Federal Register / Vol. 78, No. 17 / Friday, January 25, 2013 / Rules and Regulations 
11 We caution that many forms of health 
information, not just information about sexually 
transmitted diseases or mental health or substance 
abuse, are sensitive. 
12 Information that has been de-identified in 
accordance with 45 CFR 164.514(a)–(c) is not 
protected health information, and thus, any 
inadvertent or unauthorized use or disclosure of 
such information is not considered a breach for 
purposes of this rule. 
the interim final rule. The final rule also 
identifies the more objective factors 
covered entities and business associates 
must consider when performing a risk 
assessment to determine if the protected 
health information has been 
compromised and breach notification is 
necessary. 
Although some commenters urged us 
to implement a bright line standard, 
requiring notification for all 
impermissible uses and disclosures 
without any assessment of risk, we 
believe that a risk assessment is 
necessary. The statute acknowledges, by 
including a specific definition of breach 
and identifying exceptions to this 
definition, as well as by providing that 
an unauthorized acquisition, access, 
use, or disclosure of protected health 
information must compromise the 
security or privacy of such information 
to be a breach, that there are several 
situations in which unauthorized 
acquisition, access, use, or disclosure of 
protected health information is so 
inconsequential that it does not warrant 
notification. In addition to the statutory 
exceptions that have been included in 
both the interim final rule and this final 
rule, there may be other similar 
situations that do not warrant breach 
notification. We agree with commenters 
that providing notification in such cases 
may cause the individual unnecessary 
anxiety or even eventual apathy if 
notifications of these types of incidents 
are sent routinely. For example, if a 
covered entity misdirects a fax 
containing protected health information 
to the wrong physician practice, and 
upon receipt, the receiving physician 
calls the covered entity to say he has 
received the fax in error and has 
destroyed it, the covered entity may be 
able to demonstrate after performing a 
risk assessment that there is a low risk 
that the protected health information 
has been compromised. Although this 
scenario does not fit into any of the 
statutory or regulatory exceptions, we 
believe that, like the exceptions to 
breach, notification should not be 
required if the covered entity 
demonstrates a low probability that the 
data has been compromised. 
Commenters argued that a rule 
containing a bright line standard for 
notification would be easier for both the 
regulated entities to implement and for 
HHS to enforce. We disagree. Although 
a rule that required notification 
following every impermissible use or 
disclosure may appear easier for 
covered entities and business associates 
to implement—as no determination of 
the risk that the protected health 
information has been compromised 
would be required—in effect, a bright 
line standard would be extremely 
burdensome and costly for entities to 
implement. With no risk assessment 
following an impermissible use or 
disclosure, entities may be required to 
provide many notices each year for 
incidents that did not compromise the 
security or privacy of an individual’s 
protected health information. 
Although we do not believe a bright 
line approach to breach notification is 
appropriate, we do agree with the 
commenters who expressed concern 
that the risk assessment focus on ‘‘harm 
to an individual’’ in the interim final 
rule was too subjective and would lead 
to inconsistent interpretations and 
results across covered entities and 
business associates. As a result, instead 
of assessing the risk of harm to the 
individual, covered entities and 
business associates must assess the 
probability that the protected health 
information has been compromised 
based on a risk assessment that 
considers at least the following factors: 
(1) The nature and extent of the 
protected health information involved, 
including the types of identifiers and 
the likelihood of re-identification; (2) 
the unauthorized person who used the 
protected health information or to 
whom the disclosure was made; (3) 
whether the protected health 
information was actually acquired or 
viewed; and (4) the extent to which the 
risk to the protected health information 
has been mitigated. We believe that the 
use of these factors, which are derived 
from the factors listed in the interim 
final rule as well as many of the factors 
suggested by commenters, will result in 
a more objective evaluation of the risk 
to the protected health information and 
a more uniform application of the rule. 
As we have modified and 
incorporated the factors that must be 
considered when performing a risk 
assessment into the regulatory text, 
covered entities and business associates 
should examine their policies to ensure 
that when evaluating the risk of an 
impermissible use or disclosure they 
consider all of the required factors. In 
addition, given the circumstances of the 
impermissible use or disclosure, 
additional factors may need to be 
considered to appropriately assess the 
risk that the protected health 
information has been compromised. We 
note that, although we have included 
this risk assessment in the final rule, 
this type of assessment of risk should 
not be a new or different exercise for 
covered entities and business associates. 
Similar assessments of risk that data 
have been compromised must be 
performed routinely following security 
breaches and to comply with certain 
State breach notification laws. 
The first factor requires covered 
entities and business associates to 
evaluate the nature and the extent of the 
protected health information involved, 
including the types of identifiers and 
the likelihood of re-identification of the 
information. To assess this factor, 
entities should consider the type of 
protected health information involved 
in the impermissible use or disclosure, 
such as whether the disclosure involved 
information that is of a more sensitive 
nature. For example, with respect to 
financial information, this includes 
credit card numbers, social security 
numbers, or other information that 
increases the risk of identity theft or 
financial fraud. With respect to clinical 
information, this may involve 
considering not only the nature of the 
services or other information
11 but also 
the amount of detailed clinical 
information involved (e.g., treatment 
plan, diagnosis, medication, medical 
history information, test results). 
Considering the type of protected health 
information involved in the 
impermissible use or disclosure will 
help entities determine the probability 
that the protected health information 
could be used by an unauthorized 
recipient in a manner adverse to the 
individual or otherwise used to further 
the unauthorized recipient’s own 
interests. Additionally, in situations 
where there are few, if any, direct 
identifiers in the information 
impermissibly used or disclosed, 
entities should determine whether there 
is a likelihood that the protected health 
information released could be re- 
identified based on the context and the 
ability to link the information with 
other available information.
12 For 
example, if a covered entity 
impermissibly disclosed a list of patient 
names, addresses, and hospital 
identification numbers, the protected 
health information is obviously 
identifiable, and a risk assessment likely 
would determine that there is more than 
a low probability that the information 
has been compromised, dependent on 
an assessment of the other factors 
discussed below. Alternatively, if the 
covered entity disclosed a list of patient 
discharge dates and diagnoses, the 
VerDate Mar<15>2010 18:57 Jan 24, 2013 Jkt 229001 PO 00000 Frm 00078 Fmt 4701 Sfmt 4700 E:\FR\FM\25JAR2.SGM 25JAR2sroberts on DSK5SPTVN1PROD with 
--- page 5 ---
5643 Federal Register / Vol. 78, No. 17 / Friday, January 25, 2013 / Rules and Regulations 
entity would need to consider whether 
any of the individuals could be 
identified based on the specificity of the 
diagnosis, the size of the community 
served by the covered entity, or whether 
the unauthorized recipient of the 
information may have the ability to 
combine the information with other 
available information to re-identify the 
affected individuals (considering this 
factor in combination with the second 
factor discussed below). We emphasize, 
however, that the entity must evaluate 
all the factors, including those 
discussed below, before making a 
determination about the probability of 
risk that the protected health 
information has been compromised. 
The second factor requires covered 
entities and business associates to 
consider the unauthorized person who 
impermissibly used the protected health 
information or to whom the 
impermissible disclosure was made. 
Entities should consider whether the 
unauthorized person who received the 
information has obligations to protect 
the privacy and security of the 
information. For example, as discussed 
in the interim final rule, if protected 
health information is impermissibly 
disclosed to another entity obligated to 
abide by the HIPAA Privacy and 
Security Rules or to a Federal agency 
obligated to comply with the Privacy 
Act of 1974 and the Federal Information 
Security Management Act of 2002, there 
may be a lower probability that the 
protected health information has been 
compromised since the recipient of the 
information is obligated to protect the 
privacy and security of the information 
in a similar manner as the disclosing 
entity. We also emphasize that this 
factor should be considered in 
combination with the factor discussed 
above regarding the risk of re- 
identification. If the information 
impermissibly used or disclosed is not 
immediately identifiable, entities 
should determine whether the 
unauthorized person who received the 
protected health information has the 
ability to re-identify the information. 
For example, if information containing 
dates of health care service and 
diagnoses of certain employees was 
impermissibly disclosed to their 
employer, the employer may be able to 
determine that the information pertains 
to specific employees based on other 
information available to the employer, 
such as dates of absence from work. In 
this case, there may be more than a low 
probability that the protected health 
information has been compromised. 
Several commenters suggested that a 
risk assessment need be completed 
following only impermissible 
disclosures of protected health 
information, since information 
impermissibly ‘‘used’’ remains within 
the covered entity or business associate. 
We disagree. The final rule requires a 
risk assessment to be performed 
following both impermissible uses and 
disclosures (that do not otherwise fall 
within the other enumerated exceptions 
to breach). However, the fact that 
information only is impermissibly used 
within a covered entity or business 
associate and the impermissible use 
does not result in further impermissible 
disclosure outside the entity, is 
something that may be taken into 
account in conducting the risk 
assessment and may reduce the 
probability that the protected health 
information has been compromised. 
The third factor requires covered 
entities and business associates to 
investigate an impermissible use or 
disclosure to determine if the protected 
health information was actually 
acquired or viewed or, alternatively, if 
only the opportunity existed for the 
information to be acquired or viewed. 
For example, as we discussed in the 
interim final rule, if a laptop computer 
was stolen and later recovered and a 
forensic analysis shows that the 
protected health information on the 
computer was never accessed, viewed, 
acquired, transferred, or otherwise 
compromised, the entity could 
determine that the information was not 
actually acquired by an unauthorized 
individual even though the opportunity 
existed. In contrast, however, if a 
covered entity mailed information to the 
wrong individual who opened the 
envelope and called the entity to say 
that she received the information in 
error, then, in this case, the 
unauthorized recipient viewed and 
acquired the information because she 
opened and read the information to the 
extent that she recognized it was mailed 
to her in error. 
The final factor included in the final 
rule requires covered entities and 
business associates to consider the 
extent to which the risk to the protected 
health information has been mitigated. 
Covered entities and business associates 
should attempt to mitigate the risks to 
the protected health information 
following any impermissible use or 
disclosure, such as by obtaining the 
recipient’s satisfactory assurances that 
the information will not be further used 
or disclosed (through a confidentiality 
agreement or similar means) or will be 
destroyed, and should consider the 
extent and efficacy of the mitigation 
when determining the probability that 
the protected health information has 
been compromised. We note that this 
factor, when considered in combination 
with the factor regarding the 
unauthorized recipient of the 
information discussed above, may lead 
to different results in terms of the risk 
to the protected health information. For 
example, a covered entity may be able 
to obtain and rely on the assurances of 
an employee, affiliated entity, business 
associate, or another covered entity that 
the entity or person destroyed 
information it received in error, while 
such assurances from certain third 
parties may not be sufficient. As 
described above, certain commenters 
suggested that mitigation should only be 
considered where the recipient of the 
information is a business associate of 
the covered entity or another covered 
entity. We do not in this rule limit this 
factor to those circumstances but, as 
discussed above, acknowledge that the 
recipient of the information will have an 
impact on whether the covered entity 
can conclude that an impermissible use 
or disclosure has been appropriately 
mitigated. 
A covered entity’s or business 
associate’s analysis of the probability 
that protected health information has 
been compromised following an 
impermissible use or disclosure must 
address each factor discussed above. 
Other factors may also be considered 
where necessary. Covered entities and 
business associates must then evaluate 
the overall probability that the protected 
health information has been 
compromised by considering all the 
factors in combination, and we expect 
these risk assessments to be thorough, 
completed in good faith, and for the 
conclusions reached to be reasonable. If 
an evaluation of the factors discussed 
above fails to demonstrate that there is 
a low probability that the protected 
health information has been 
compromised, breach notification is 
required. We do note, however, that a 
covered entity or business associate has 
the discretion to provide the required 
notifications following an impermissible 
use or disclosure of protected health 
information without performing a risk 
assessment. Because the final rule 
clarifies the presumption that a breach 
has occurred following every 
impermissible use or disclosure of 
protected health information, entities 
may decide to notify without evaluation 
of the probability that the protected 
health information has been 
compromised. In the future, we will 
issue additional guidance to aid covered 
entities and business associates in 
performing risk assessments with 
respect to frequently occurring 
scenarios. 
VerDate Mar<15>2010 18:57 Jan 24, 2013 Jkt 229001 PO 00000 Frm 00079 Fmt 4701 Sfmt 4700 E:\FR\FM\25JAR2.SGM 25JAR2sroberts on DSK5SPTVN1PROD with 
--- page 6 ---
5644 Federal Register / Vol. 78, No. 17 / Friday, January 25, 2013 / Rules and Regulations 
In addition to the removal of the harm 
standard and the creation of more 
objective factors to evaluate the 
probability that protected health 
information has been compromised, we 
have removed the exception for limited 
data sets that do not contain any dates 
of birth and zip codes. In the final rule, 
following the impermissible use or 
disclosure of any limited data set, a 
covered entity or business associate 
must perform a risk assessment that 
evaluates the factors discussed above to 
determine if breach notification is not 
required. 
The vast majority of commenters were 
not supportive of the exception for 
certain limited data sets outlined in the 
interim final rule, either because they 
believed the exception did not go far 
enough and would chill research that 
needed access to birth dates and zip 
codes in limited data sets, or because of 
concerns regarding the re-identifiability 
of the limited information to which the 
exception applied. Based on the 
comments, we believe it is appropriate 
to require the impermissible use or 
disclosure of a limited data set, even 
those that do not contain dates of birth 
and zip codes, to be subject to a risk 
assessment to demonstrate that breach 
notification is not required. The final 
rule expressly includes a factor that 
would require consideration of the re- 
identifiability of the information, as 
well a factor that requires an assessment 
of the unauthorized person who used 
the protected health information or to 
whom the disclosure was made (i.e., 
whether this person has the ability to re- 
identify the affected individuals). Thus, 
the factors are particularly suited to 
address the probability that a data set 
without direct identifiers has been 
compromised following an 
impermissible use or disclosure. 
Further, we believe in most cases that 
the result would be the same under this 
final rule as under the interim final rule 
with respect to whether an 
impermissible use or disclosure of a 
limited data set that also excludes dates 
of birth and zip codes constitutes a 
breach for which notification is 
required. Due to the lack of identifiers 
present in the protected health 
information, entities may reasonably 
determine that there is a low probability 
of risk that the information has been 
compromised; however, we stress that 
this is a fact specific determination to be 
made based on the circumstances of the 
impermissible use or disclosure. 
We encourage covered entities and 
business associates to take advantage of 
the safe harbor provision of the breach 
notification rule by encrypting limited 
data sets and other protected health 
information pursuant to the Guidance 
Specifying the Technologies and 
Methodologies that Render Protected 
Health Information Unusable, 
Unreadable, or Indecipherable to 
Unauthorized Individuals (74 FR 42740, 
42742). If protected health information 
is encrypted pursuant to this guidance, 
then no breach notification is required 
following an impermissible use or 
disclosure of the information. 
In addition to the comments 
discussed above, it was suggested that 
covered entities be required to include 
in their notice of privacy practices 
information about how a risk 
assessment will be conducted or their 
internal policies for determining 
whether a breach has occurred and 
notification is warranted. It was also 
suggested that the breach notice to the 
individual following discovery of a 
breach of unsecured protected health 
information contain information about 
the covered entity or business 
associate’s risk assessment to help the 
individual better assess the level of 
threat posed by the breach and to better 
determine the appropriate steps, if any, 
to take. 
We decline to require that the covered 
entity’s notice of privacy practices 
include a description of how a risk 
assessment will be conducted, although 
covered entities may include such 
information in their notice of privacy 
practices if they choose. While each risk 
assessment will differ depending on the 
specific facts and circumstances 
surrounding the impermissible use or 
disclosure, we believe that the 
modifications in this final rule will help 
ensure that covered entities and 
business associates perform risk 
assessments more uniformly and 
objectively. We also note that the 
content requirements for the notice to 
the individual outlined in § 164.404(c) 
already require that the individual be 
notified of the circumstances of a 
breach, as well as what steps 
individuals should take to protect 
themselves from potential harm 
resulting from the breach. 
One commenter suggested that we 
require a covered entity to hire an 
independent organization to assess the 
risk of an impermissible use or 
disclosure to determine if breach 
notification is required. We do not 
believe such a requirement is necessary, 
although covered entities are free to 
engage independent organizations to 
assist in making such determinations 
provided that, if access to protected 
health information is required, business 
associate agreements are entered into to 
protect the information. Further, we 
believe the modifications in this final 
rule are conducive to more uniform risk 
assessments across covered entities and 
business associates. Additionally, as 
with the interim final rule, we note that 
covered entities and business associates 
have the burden of proof, pursuant to 
§ 164.414, to demonstrate that all 
notifications were provided or that an 
impermissible use or disclosure did not 
constitute a breach and to maintain 
documentation (e.g., of the risk 
assessment demonstrating that there 
was a low probability that the protected 
health information had been 
compromised or of the assessment that 
the impermissible use or disclosure falls 
within one of the other exceptions to 
breach), pursuant to 45 CFR 
164.530(j)(1)(iv), as necessary to meet 
this burden of proof. Thus, covered 
entities and business associates have 
adequate incentive to conduct 
reasonable and diligent risk 
assessments. 
Finally, after reviewing and 
considering the comments received 
regarding the exceptions to the 
definition of breach in the interim final 
rule, the Department adopts these 
exceptions without modification in this 
final rule. Although the substance of 
these exceptions has not changed, these 
exceptions are now located at paragraph 
(1) of the definition of breach instead of 
paragraph (2) to accommodate the 
modifications discussed above. We 
respond to the public comments 
addressing these exceptions, as well as 
other comments received on the 
definition of ‘‘breach,’’ below. 
Response to Other Public Comments 
Comment: Many commenters 
expressed concern that violations of the 
minimum necessary standard may 
trigger breach notification obligations. 
Response: We do not believe it would 
be appropriate to exempt minimum 
necessary violations from the breach 
notification obligations as we do not 
believe that all minimum necessary 
violations present a low probability that 
the protected health information has 
been compromised. Thus, uses or 
disclosures that impermissibly involve 
more than the minimum necessary 
information, in violation of 
§§ 164.502(b) and 164.514(d), may 
qualify as breaches. Such incidents 
must be evaluated as any other 
impermissible uses or disclosures to 
determine whether breach notification 
is not required. 
As explained above, there are several 
factors to be considered when 
determining the probability that the 
protected health information involved 
in an impermissible use or disclosure 
has been compromised, including the 
VerDate Mar<15>2010 18:57 Jan 24, 2013 Jkt 229001 PO 00000 Frm 00080 Fmt 4701 Sfmt 4700 E:\FR\FM\25JAR2.SGM 25JAR2sroberts on DSK5SPTVN1PROD with 
--- page 7 ---
5645 Federal Register / Vol. 78, No. 17 / Friday, January 25, 2013 / Rules and Regulations 
unauthorized person who used the 
information or to whom the disclosure 
was made. Thus, where a minimum 
necessary violation occurs in a 
disclosure to a business associate or as 
an internal use within a covered entity 
or business associate, the fact that the 
information was not acquired by a third 
party would be considered as part of the 
risk assessment and may help lead to 
the conclusion that there is a low 
probability that the protected health 
information has been compromised. 
Alternatively, covered entities and 
business associates may determine that 
certain minimum necessary violations 
fall within the exceptions to the 
definition of breach at § 164.402(1)(i) or 
(1)(ii). 
We note that the Privacy Rule’s 
minimum necessary standard requires a 
covered entity to make reasonable 
efforts to limit access to protected health 
information to those persons or classes 
of persons who need access to protected 
health information to carry out their 
duties and to disclose an amount of 
protected health information reasonably 
necessary to achieve the purpose of a 
disclosure. The Privacy Rule requires 
covered entities to determine and define 
in their policies and procedures how the 
minimum necessary standard applies to 
their own uses and disclosures. Thus, 
covered entities are in a good position 
to know when such policies and 
procedures have been violated and to 
assess the probability that the incident 
has compromised the security or 
privacy of the information. Finally, we 
will consider including further guidance 
regarding the interaction between the 
minimum necessary standard and the 
breach notification requirements in the 
guidance required by section 
13405(b)(1)(B) of the HITECH Act. 
Comment: Several commenters asked 
that we clarify the differences between 
‘‘acquisition,’’ ‘‘access,’’ ‘‘use,’’ and 
‘‘disclosure’’ in the exceptions in the 
final rule. These commenters expressed 
confusion regarding the use of these 
terms in the first two exceptions to the 
definition of breach, stating that the 
term ‘‘acquisition’’ connotes a 
disclosure of information, and thus, the 
exception regarding unintentional 
acquisition, access, or use of protected 
health information by a workforce 
member or person acting under the 
authority of a covered entity or business 
associate implicitly includes disclosures 
of protected health information. 
Response: While the Privacy Rule 
uses the terms ‘‘use’’ and ‘‘disclosure,’’ 
we included both ‘‘acquisition’’ and 
‘‘access’’ in the regulatory text for 
consistency with the statutory language. 
We interpret ‘‘acquisition’’ and ‘‘access’’ 
to information based on their plain 
meanings and believe that both terms 
are encompassed within the current 
definitions of ‘‘use’’ and ‘‘disclosure’’ in 
the HIPAA Rules. For example, an 
acquisition may be a ‘‘use’’ or 
‘‘disclosure’’ depending on who 
acquired the information—i.e., a 
workforce member or someone outside 
the covered entity, such as a business 
associate. 
Comment: Several commenters 
supported our interpretations of the 
statutory terms ‘‘employee,’’ ‘‘same 
facility,’’ and ‘‘similarly situated 
individual’’ with respect to the 
exceptions to the definition of breach. 
Response: We retain these 
clarifications in this final rule. 
Comment: Some commenters asked 
that we use the term ‘‘use’’ instead of 
‘‘disclosure’’ to describe the type of 
information exchange contemplated by 
the exception for certain inadvertent 
disclosures among persons similarly 
authorized to access protected health 
information at a covered entity or 
business associate since the information 
must be shared within a covered entity 
or business associate for the exception 
to apply. 
Response: We clarify that the 
exception at paragraph (1)(ii) of the 
definition of ‘‘breach’’ is intended to 
apply to certain ‘‘disclosures’’ that may 
occur ‘‘at’’ a covered entity, business 
associate, or organized health care 
arrangement in which the covered entity 
participates—e.g., to persons onsite at a 
covered entity’s facility that are not 
workforce members, such as physicians 
with staff privileges at a hospital. For 
impermissible ‘‘uses’’ of protected 
health information among workforce 
members of a covered entity or a 
business associate, a covered entity or 
business associate should determine 
whether the exception to breach at 
paragraph (1)(i) regarding certain 
unintentional acquisition, access, or use 
by a workforce member or person acting 
under the authority of a covered entity 
or business associate applies. 
Comment: One commenter asked if 
breach notification is required in cases 
where an impermissible use or 
disclosure originally qualifies for either 
of the exceptions to breach at 
§ 164.402(1)(i) or (1)(ii) at the time the 
incident occurs but later no longer fits 
within the exception because the 
protected health information is further 
used or disclosed in an impermissible 
manner. 
Response: The applicability of an 
exception to breach must be judged at 
the time the incident is discovered and 
evaluated. If an exception to breach is 
determined to apply such that 
notification is not warranted, the 
inquiry into that breach ends; however, 
the covered entity or business associate 
should take appropriate steps to ensure 
that the information is not further used 
or disclosed impermissibly. If, sometime 
after making the determination that the 
exception applied, the information is 
impermissibly used or disclosed, the 
covered entity or business associate 
should treat that incident as a separate 
impermissible use or disclosure that 
warrants evaluation as a breach on its 
own. As explained more fully below, we 
treat a breach as having occurred at the 
time of the impermissible use or 
disclosure, which in the case of the first 
two exceptions to breach, is at the time 
of the ‘‘further’’ impermissible use or 
disclosure. 
Comment: One commenter asked that 
we broaden the application of the 
inadvertent disclosure exception to 
apply to all routine disclosures between 
covered entities. Other commenters 
asked that the rule exempt from the 
breach notification obligations 
situations in which a covered entity 
discloses information to a business 
associate or another covered entity. 
Commenters noted that because covered 
entities and business associates are 
required to protect the privacy of 
protected health information, there is 
little risk that even an impermissible 
disclosure between such entities would 
compromise the security or privacy of 
the information. 
Response: We do not agree that such 
situations warrant a blanket exception 
from the breach notification rules. In 
appropriate cases, some of these 
impermissible disclosures among 
covered entities and covered entities 
and business associates may fall within 
the existing exceptions to breach at 
paragraphs (1)(i) and (ii) of the 
definition. Otherwise, such disclosures 
must be evaluated as to the probability 
that the protected health information 
has been compromised based on a risk 
assessment of a number of factors. 
While the fact that the recipient of an 
impermissible disclosure is a covered 
entity or business associate with 
obligations to protect the privacy and 
security of protected health information 
is a consideration with respect to 
assessing the risk that the protected 
health information has been 
compromised, it is not the only factor. 
For example, a covered entity or 
business associate must also evaluate 
the extent to which the risk to the 
protected health information has been 
mitigated. 
Comment: Several commenters 
suggested that the exceptions to breach 
should not apply to situations where 
VerDate Mar<15>2010 18:57 Jan 24, 2013 Jkt 229001 PO 00000 Frm 00081 Fmt 4701 Sfmt 4700 E:\FR\FM\25JAR2.SGM 25JAR2sroberts on DSK5SPTVN1PROD with 
--- page 8 ---
5646 Federal Register / Vol. 78, No. 17 / Friday, January 25, 2013 / Rules and Regulations 
workforce members or employees 
further use or disclose information they 
unintentionally or inadvertently 
acquired, accessed, or used, even if such 
further use or disclosure is permitted 
under the Privacy Rule. Additionally, 
these commenters suggested that the 
breach exceptions should apply only in 
cases in which the workforce member or 
employee has taken appropriate steps to 
mitigate the unintentional acquisition, 
access, or use of protected health 
information, such as by alerting the 
sender of the misdirected information, if 
applicable, and returning or destroying 
it. 
Response: We do not believe it is 
appropriate to prohibit the sharing of 
protected health information for 
permissible purposes following an 
unintentional or inadvertent error by a 
workforce member or an employee. 
Doing so would restrict access and 
disclosure of the protected health 
information for necessary treatment and 
other important purposes to the extent 
the workforce member or employee 
needed access to the information in the 
future for authorized purposes, which 
would adversely affect health care 
delivery. We believe that the rule strikes 
an appropriate balance by not allowing 
workforce member errors to be excepted 
from the definition of breach in cases 
where the workforce member takes the 
information he or she has mistakenly 
obtained and then misuses it. 
With respect to requiring workforce 
members or employees to take 
appropriate steps to mitigate their 
unintentional access to protected health 
information, we note that the Privacy 
Rule already requires covered entities to 
ensure as part of their minimum 
necessary policies and procedures that 
workforce members have appropriate 
access to protected health information. 
Therefore, covered entities should 
ensure that workforce members who 
gain access in an unauthorized manner 
to protected health information do not 
continue to have such unauthorized 
access. This may require having policies 
which require workforce members to 
return or destroy the information to 
which they obtained unauthorized 
access. Further, covered entities must 
implement reasonable safeguards to 
protect against impermissible uses and 
disclosures, including further 
impermissible uses and disclosures by a 
workforce member who has gained 
unauthorized access to protected health 
information. 
Comment: One commenter asked that 
we include an exception in the final 
rule for situations in which a laptop is 
lost and recovered and a forensic 
analysis shows that the protected health 
information on the computer was not 
accessed. The commenter stated that 
because the forensic analysis showed 
that the information was not 
compromised, a risk assessment should 
not be required. 
Response: We do not include an 
explicit exception for this particular 
scenario. As we explained above, in 
cases where a lost laptop is recovered, 
the fact that a forensic analysis of the 
computer shows that its information 
was not accessed is a relevant 
consideration for the risk assessment, 
and entities in such situations may be 
able to demonstrate a low probability 
that the information has been 
compromised. However, covered 
entities and business associates still 
must document their risk assessments in 
these cases. We also note, as we did in 
the interim final rule, if a computer is 
lost or stolen, we do not consider it 
reasonable to delay breach notification 
based on the hope that the computer 
will be recovered. 
Comment: Some commenters asked 
that we create an exception to breach to 
cover certain routine impermissible 
disclosures of protected health 
information. For example, commenters 
asked that we except from notification 
disclosures made as a result of the 
covered entity mailing information to a 
patient’s old address, faxing information 
to the wrong number, disclosures made 
as a result of leaving a voice message at 
the wrong number reminding a patient 
of an upcoming appointment, or, in 
situations where patients have identical 
or similar names, contacting the wrong 
patient to inform him or her that lab 
results were ready. 
Response: We decline to create such 
an exception. The ability of a covered 
entity or business associate to 
demonstrate that a particular situation 
poses a low probability that the 
protected health information was 
compromised is very fact specific and 
will depend on an assessment of all of 
the factors discussed above, such as to 
whom the information was disclosed, 
what information was disclosed, and 
what mitigation has taken place. We 
also note that, in some cases, some of 
the situations contemplated by the 
commenters may fall within an existing 
exception. For example, if a covered 
entity mails protected health 
information about an individual to a 
wrong address, the impermissible 
disclosure may fall into the exception at 
paragraph (1)(iii) of the definition of 
breach if the information is returned, 
undelivered and unopened, to the 
covered entity, such that an 
unauthorized recipient could not 
reasonably have retained the 
information. If, however, the 
information was not returned or if the 
covered entity was informed by the 
unauthorized recipient that he had 
received and opened the mail in error, 
the covered entity would need to 
complete a risk assessment to determine 
the probability that the protected health 
information had been compromised as a 
result of the impermissible disclosure. 
Comment: Several commenters asked 
that we harmonize the final rule with 
the FTC’s Health Breach Notification 
final rule. 
Response: Although the FTC and HHS 
breach notification rules generally apply 
to different entities, HHS has worked 
closely with the FTC to ensure both sets 
of regulations were harmonized to the 
greatest extent possible by including the 
same or similar requirements within the 
constraints of the statutory language. In 
addition, in the few situations where an 
entity provides PHRs to customers of a 
HIPAA covered entity through a 
business associate arrangement but also 
provides PHRs directly to the public 
and a breach of its records occurs, in 
certain cases, the FTC will deem 
compliance with certain provisions of 
HHS’ rule as compliance with FTC’s 
rule. See 74 FR 42964. In particular, in 
such situations, it may be appropriate 
for the vendor to provide the same 
breach notice to all its PHR customers 
since it has a direct relationship with all 
the affected individuals. Thus, in those 
limited circumstances where a vendor 
of PHRs (1) provides notice to 
individuals on behalf of a HIPAA 
covered entity, (2) has dealt directly 
with these individuals in managing 
their PHR accounts, and (3) provides 
notice to its customers at the same time, 
the FTC will deem compliance with 
HHS requirements governing the timing, 
method, and content of notice to be 
compliance with the corresponding FTC 
rule provisions. Note, however, that the 
PHR vendor still must comply with all 
other FTC rule requirements, including 
the requirement to notify the FTC 
within ten business days after 
discovering the breach. 
b. Definition of ‘‘Unsecured Protected 
Health Information’’ 
Interim Final Rule 
Section 13402(h)(1)(A) of the Act 
defines ‘‘unsecured protected health 
information’’ as ‘‘protected health 
information’’ that is not secured through 
the use of a technology or methodology 
specified by the Secretary in guidance 
issued under [section 13402(h)(2)].’’ The 
Act at section 13402(h)(2) requires that 
the Secretary specify in the guidance the 
technologies and methodologies that 
VerDate Mar<15>2010 18:57 Jan 24, 2013 Jkt 229001 PO 00000 Frm 00082 Fmt 4701 Sfmt 4700 E:\FR\FM\25JAR2.SGM 25JAR2sroberts on DSK5SPTVN1PROD with 
--- page 9 ---
5647 Federal Register / Vol. 78, No. 17 / Friday, January 25, 2013 / Rules and Regulations 
render protected health information 
unusable, unreadable, or indecipherable 
to unauthorized individuals. 
Accordingly, the interim final rule 
defined ‘‘unsecured protected health 
information’’ as protected health 
information that is not rendered 
unusable, unreadable, or indecipherable 
to unauthorized individuals through the 
use of a technology or methodology 
specified by the Secretary in guidance. 
This guidance, which was published in 
updated form within the preamble to 
the interim final rule and made 
available on the HHS Web site, specifies 
that only encryption and destruction, 
consistent with National Institute of 
Standards and Technology (NIST) 
guidelines, renders protected health 
information unusable, unreadable, or 
indecipherable to unauthorized 
individuals such that notification is not 
required in the event of a breach of such 
information. 
Overview of Public Comments 
While we received a number of 
technical and other comments on the 
guidance, we did not receive any 
comments on the language of the above 
definition itself. We intend to address 
the comments on the guidance in our 
next update to the guidance. 
Final Rule 
The final rule modifies the interim 
final rule’s definition of ‘‘unsecured 
protected health information’’ to replace 
the term ‘‘unauthorized individuals’’ in 
the definition with ‘‘unauthorized 
persons.’’ The term ‘‘individual’’ is 
defined in § 160.103 to mean the person 
who is the subject of the protected 
health information, which is not what is 
intended with the reference to 
‘‘individual’’ in the definition of 
‘‘unsecured protected health 
information.’’ Accordingly, the final 
rule uses more appropriately the term 
‘‘unauthorized persons.’’ The final rule 
also modifies the definition to remove 
the term ‘‘on the HHS Web site’’ as 
unnecessary language. While we remove 
the reference to the HHS Web site from 
the regulatory text, we do plan to 
continue to post updates to the guidance 
on the Web site as they are issued. 
2. Section 164.404—Notification to 
Individuals 
Interim Final Rule 
Section 13402(a) of the Act provides 
that a covered entity that accesses, 
maintains, retains, modifies, records, 
stores, destroys, or otherwise holds, 
uses, or discloses unsecured protected 
health information shall, in the case of 
a breach of such information that is 
discovered by the covered entity, notify 
each affected individual whose 
unsecured protected health information 
has been, or is reasonably believed by 
the covered entity to have been, 
accessed, acquired, or disclosed as a 
result of such breach. Accordingly, 
§ 164.404(a)(1) of the interim final rule 
included the general rule that a covered 
entity shall, following the discovery of 
a breach of unsecured protected health 
information, notify each individual 
whose unsecured protected health 
information has been, or is reasonably 
believed to have been accessed, 
acquired, used, or disclosed as a result 
of such breach. 
Breaches Treated as Discovered 
Section 13402(c) of the HITECH Act 
states that a breach shall be treated as 
discovered by a covered entity or 
business associate as of the first day on 
which such breach is known or should 
reasonably have been known to the 
covered entity or business associate. 
The Act also specifies that this 
discovery is triggered as soon as any 
person, other than the individual 
committing the breach, who is an 
employee, officer, or other agent of the 
covered entity or business associate 
knows or should reasonably have 
known of the breach. 
Section 164.404(a)(2) of the interim 
final rule implemented the Act’s 
discovery provision, with respect to 
covered entities by stating that a breach 
shall be treated as discovered by a 
covered entity on the first day the 
breach is known to the covered entity, 
or by exercising reasonable diligence 
would have been known to the covered 
entity. The interim final rule 
incorporated the term ‘‘by exercising 
reasonable diligence,’’ which is used in 
the HIPAA Enforcement Rule and 
defined to mean the ‘‘business care and 
prudence expected from a person 
seeking to satisfy a legal requirement 
under similar circumstances.’’ 
Section 164.404(a)(2) of the interim 
final rule further provided, in 
accordance with the Act, that a covered 
entity is deemed to have knowledge of 
a breach if such breach is known, or by 
exercising reasonable diligence would 
have been known, to any person other 
than the person committing the breach, 
who is a workforce member or agent of 
the covered entity. Thus, the breach is 
treated as discovered by the covered 
entity at the time the workforce member 
or other agent has knowledge of the 
breach. The rule also clarified that the 
federal common law of agency controls 
in determining who is an agent of the 
covered entity, which is consistent with 
how agency liability is determined 
under the HIPAA Rules. 
Overview of Public Comments 
Several commenters argued that a 
breach should be treated as discovered 
by a covered entity only after 
management has been notified of the 
incident. Commenters stated that the 
Department should not hold an entity 
responsible for knowing of a breach if 
an appropriately trained employee fails 
to inform the proper persons within the 
entity of a breach. Other commenters 
asked for guidance and more 
clarification regarding what it means for 
a covered entity or business associate to 
be exercising reasonable diligence, such 
as what frequency of monitoring for 
breaches is expected or what types of 
systems must covered entities and 
business associates have in place to 
detect breaches. 
Final Rule 
We retain § 164.404(a)(2) in this final 
rule without modification. We decline 
to adopt the suggestion that a covered 
entity be deemed to have discovered a 
breach only when management is 
notified of the breach. The HITECH Act 
itself provides that a breach is to be 
treated as discovered by a covered entity 
or business associate if ‘‘any person, 
other than the individual committing 
the breach, that is an employee, officer, 
or other agent of such entity or 
associate’’ knows or should reasonably 
have known of the breach. This concept 
is also consistent with the HIPAA 
Enforcement Rule and the Federal 
common law of agency. We encourage 
covered entities and business associates 
to ensure their workforce members and 
other agents are adequately trained on 
the importance of prompt reporting of 
privacy and security incidents. 
With respect to those commenters 
asking for guidance on what it means for 
a covered entity to be exercising 
reasonable diligence, we note that the 
term reasonable diligence, as defined in 
§ 160.401, means the business care and 
prudence expected from a person 
seeking to satisfy a legal requirement 
under similar circumstances. The 
determination of whether a person acted 
with reasonable diligence is generally a 
factual one, since what is reasonable 
depends on the circumstances. Factors 
to be considered include whether a 
covered entity or business associate took 
reasonable steps to learn of breaches 
and whether there were indications of 
breaches that a person seeking to satisfy 
the Rule would have investigated under 
similar circumstances. Covered entities 
and business associates may wish to 
look to how other covered entities and 
business associates operating under 
VerDate Mar<15>2010 18:57 Jan 24, 2013 Jkt 229001 PO 00000 Frm 00083 Fmt 4701 Sfmt 4700 E:\FR\FM\25JAR2.SGM 25JAR2sroberts on DSK5SPTVN1PROD with 
--- page 10 ---
5654 Federal Register / Vol. 78, No. 17 / Friday, January 25, 2013 / Rules and Regulations 
whether the breach involved more than 
500 residents of a particular State or 
jurisdiction (the threshold for triggering 
notification to the media under 
§ 164.406 of the interim final rule). 
Thus, where a covered entity has 
discovered a breach involving 600 
individuals, 300 of which reside in 
Maryland and 300 of which reside in 
the District of Columbia, notification of 
the breach must be provided to the 
Secretary concurrently with notification 
to the affected individuals. However, in 
this example, the breach would not 
trigger the requirement to notify the 
media under § 164.406 because the 
breach did not involve more than 500 
residents of any one State or 
jurisdiction. 
For breaches involving less than 500 
individuals, § 164.408(c) requires a 
covered entity to maintain a log or other 
documentation of such breaches and to 
submit information annually to the 
Secretary for breaches occurring during 
the preceding calendar year. The 
interim final rule required the 
submission of this information to the 
Secretary no later than 60 days after the 
end of each calendar year. As with 
notification of the larger breaches, the 
interim final rule required that 
information about breaches involving 
less than 500 individuals be provided to 
the Secretary in the manner specified on 
the HHS Web site. 
Although covered entities need only 
provide notification to the Secretary of 
breaches involving less than 500 
individuals annually, they must still 
provide notification of such breaches to 
affected individuals without 
unreasonable delay and not later than 
60 days after discovery of the breach 
pursuant to § 164.404. In addition, 
pursuant to § 164.414(a), a covered 
entity must follow the documentation 
requirements that otherwise apply to the 
HIPAA Privacy Rule under § 164.530 
with respect to the requirements of this 
rule. Thus, pursuant to § 164.530(j)(2), 
covered entities must maintain the 
internal log or other documentation for 
six years. Further, as with other 
required documentation, a covered 
entity must make such information 
available to the Secretary upon request 
for compliance and enforcement 
purposes in accordance with § 160.310. 
Overview of Public Comments 
Some commenters expressed concern 
regarding the timing of providing 
notification to the Secretary of breaches 
affecting fewer than 500 individuals. 
These commenters asked when 
notification should be provided if a 
covered entity discovers, after the 
reporting deadline, a breach that 
occurred in the previous year. Several 
others commented on the interim final 
rule’s process for providing the 
Secretary with breach notification. 
Some commenters asked that this 
process be revised to allow covered 
entities to maintain a log of all breaches 
affecting fewer than 500 individuals and 
then submit that log, via attachment 
(such as an Excel spreadsheet), to the 
Secretary on an annual basis. These 
commenters stated that submitting 
reports of these smaller breaches in this 
manner would be much less 
burdensome than submitting the reports 
individually. Other commenters asked 
that we provide a template log for 
entities to use to document smaller 
breaches for annual submission to the 
Secretary. Additionally, several 
commenters suggested that there be 
access or authentication controls for 
submitting breach reports because of 
concerns of false breach reports being 
submitted to the Secretary without the 
covered entity’s knowledge. 
Final Rule 
The final rule retains § 164.408(c) 
with one modification. The 
modification clarifies that covered 
entities are required to notify the 
Secretary of all breaches of unsecured 
protected health information affecting 
fewer than 500 individuals not later 
than 60 days after the end of the 
calendar year in which the breaches 
were ‘‘discovered,’’ not in which the 
breaches ‘‘occurred.’’ We recognize that 
there may be situations where, despite 
having reasonable and appropriate 
breach detection systems in place, a 
breach may go undetected for some 
time. In these cases, if a breach of 
unsecured protected health information 
affecting fewer than 500 individuals that 
occurred in the previous year is 
discovered, the covered entity has until 
60 days after the end of the calendar 
year in which the breach was 
discovered to provide notice to the 
Secretary. We emphasize, however, that 
this modification does not alter a 
covered entity’s obligation to promptly 
report the breach to affected individuals 
without unreasonable delay but in no 
cases later than 60 calendar days after 
discovery of the breach. 
In response to the comments 
suggesting that covered entities be 
permitted to submit a log of all smaller 
breaches to the Secretary instead of 
submitting each breach individually 
through the online form, we agree that 
the current process may be burdensome 
for some entities and are considering 
alternative ways to receive such reports. 
With respect to the commenters who 
asked that access or authentication 
controls be added to the breach 
reporting form, we do not believe this is 
necessary at the present time. Since the 
Department began receiving and 
processing breach reports on September 
23, 2009, we have not yet received a 
report that has been falsely submitted by 
an individual or entity not acting on 
behalf of the covered entity. 
Additionally, we emphasize that 
following receipt of a breach report that 
affects 500 or more individuals, we 
contact the covered entity identified in 
the breach report and verify the 
information in the report before we post 
any information about the breach on the 
HHS Web site. If circumstances change 
in the future, we will explore options 
for modifying the process. 
Response to Other Public Comments 
Comment: One commenter asked that 
the final rule should not interpret the 
term ‘‘immediately’’ in the statute to 
mean without unreasonable delay, but 
in no case later than 60 days, but rather 
to mean as soon as the breach is 
discovered. Another commenter asked 
that the final rule expand the timeframe 
for providing notification to the 
Secretary to no later than 120 days after 
discovery of a breach. 
Response: We believe that our 
interpretation of ‘‘immediately’’ with 
respect to notification to the Secretary 
for breaches affecting 500 or more 
individuals is reasonable and 
appropriate and thus, retain the 
provision that requires such notice be 
provided contemporaneously with 
notice to the individual. Requiring 
contemporaneous notice allows the 
notice to the Secretary to include all of 
the information provided in the notice 
to the individual and better ensures that 
a covered entity does not report 
information to the Secretary that later 
turns out to be incorrect because the 
entity did not have sufficient time to 
conduct an investigation into the facts 
surrounding the breach. In addition, this 
interpretation satisfies the statutory 
requirement that notifications of larger 
breaches be provided to the Secretary 
immediately (as they occur) as 
compared to the reports of smaller 
breaches the statute allows be reported 
annually to the Secretary. 
Comment: Some commenters asked 
for further guidance on submitting 
online breach notifications to the 
Secretary. Additionally, some 
commenters asked that HHS provide a 
confirmation to submitters that an 
initial breach report or an addendum to 
a breach report has been successfully 
submitted. 
Response: Since the publication of the 
interim final rule, OCR has posted 
VerDate Mar<15>2010 18:57 Jan 24, 2013 Jkt 229001 PO 00000 Frm 00090 Fmt 4701 Sfmt 4700 E:\FR\FM\25JAR2.SGM 25JAR2sroberts on DSK5SPTVN1PROD with 
--- page 11 ---
5655 Federal Register / Vol. 78, No. 17 / Friday, January 25, 2013 / Rules and Regulations 
instructions for filling out and 
submitting the breach form on its Web 
site: http://www.hhs.gov/ocr/privacy/ 
hipaa/administrative/ 
breachnotificationrule/ 
brinstruction.html. We will continue to 
examine the instructions for submitting 
breach notification to the Secretary and 
will update this information, as 
necessary, to ensure that covered 
entities are able to navigate and submit 
the form easily. The Department has 
also made changes to the process to 
ensure that covered entities receive a 
confirmation following their submission 
of breach notification to the Secretary. 
Additionally, we note that the breach 
reporting form does include an option 
for indicating that a submission is an 
addendum to a previous submission. 
OCR updates the original breach report, 
as appropriate, with any additional or 
modified information submitted in an 
addendum. 
Comment: With respect to the posting 
of breaches affecting 500 or more 
individuals on the HHS Web site, some 
commenters stated that these breach 
submissions must be verified with the 
covered entity before they are posted 
publicly. Other commenters asked for 
clarification of what information will be 
posted, while another commenter asked 
that we post only the name of the 
covered entity involved in the breach. 
Finally, one commenter suggested that 
we only post these breaches on our Web 
site for a six month period. 
Response: To provide helpful 
information to the public, OCR 
currently posts the following 
information regarding breaches affecting 
500 or more individuals: name of the 
covered entity (and if applicable, the 
business associate) involved; State 
where the covered entity is located; 
number of individuals affected by the 
breach; the date of the breach; type of 
breach (e.g., theft, loss, unauthorized 
access/disclosure); and location of the 
breached information (e.g., laptop, 
paper records, desktop computer). Prior 
to posting this information, OCR verifies 
the information in the breach 
notification report with the covered 
entity. We do not believe it would serve 
the public to only disclose the name of 
the covered entity involved in each of 
the breaches, because the additional 
information enables members of the 
public to understand the nature of the 
breach and to determine if the breach 
affects them directly. In terms of how 
long information about each of the 
breaches is to remain posted, we intend 
to maintain the information on our Web 
site for as long as there is public interest 
and the data can remain posted in a 
manner that gives the public access 
effectively and efficiently. 
5. Section 164.410—Notification by a 
Business Associate 
Interim Final Rule 
Section 13402(b) of the HITECH Act 
requires a business associate of a 
covered entity that accesses, maintains, 
retains, modifies, records, destroys, or 
otherwise holds, uses, or discloses 
unsecured protected health information 
to notify the covered entity when it 
discovers a breach of such information. 
The Act requires business associates to 
provide such notification to covered 
entities without unreasonable delay and 
in no case later than 60 days from 
discovery of the breach. Additionally, 
the Act requires business associates to 
provide covered entities with the 
identity of each individual whose 
unsecured protected health information 
has, or is reasonably believed to have 
been, affected by the breach. Section 
164.410(a) implements section 13402(b) 
of the Act. 
A business associate is required to 
notify the covered entity of the breach 
of unsecured protected health 
information so that the covered entity 
can notify affected individuals. In the 
interim final rule, we clarified that a 
business associate that maintains the 
protected health information of multiple 
covered entities need notify only the 
covered entity(s) to which the breached 
information relates. However, in cases 
in which a breach involves the 
unsecured protected health information 
of multiple covered entities and it is 
unclear to whom the breached 
information relates, it may be necessary 
to notify all potentially affected covered 
entities. 
Section 164.410(a)(2) provides that a 
breach shall be treated as discovered by 
a business associate as of the first day 
on which such breach is known to the 
business associate or, by exercising 
reasonable diligence, would have been 
known to the business associate. As 
with a covered entity, a business 
associate shall be deemed to have 
knowledge of a breach if the breach is 
known, or by exercising reasonable 
diligence would have been known, to 
any person, other than the person 
committing the breach, who is an 
employee, officer, or other agent of the 
business associate (determined in 
accordance with the Federal common 
law of agency). Similarly, as with 
knowledge imputed to covered entities, 
the Federal common law of agency 
controls in determining who is an agent 
of the business associate. 
Section 164.410(b) requires that a 
business associate provide notice of a 
breach of unsecured protected health 
information to a covered entity without 
unreasonable delay and in no case later 
than 60 days following the discovery of 
a breach. With respect to timing, if a 
business associate is acting as an agent 
of a covered entity, then, pursuant to 
§ 164.404(a)(2), the business associate’s 
discovery of the breach will be imputed 
to the covered entity. In such 
circumstances, the covered entity must 
provide notifications under § 164.404(a) 
based on the time the business associate 
discovers the breach, not from the time 
the business associate notifies the 
covered entity. In contrast, if the 
business associate is not an agent of the 
covered entity, then the covered entity 
is required to provide notification based 
on the time the business associate 
notifies the covered entity of the breach. 
We encouraged covered entities and 
business associates to address the 
timing of this notification in their 
business associate contracts. 
Section 164.410(c)(1) requires 
business associates, to the extent 
possible, to provide covered entities 
with the identity of each individual 
whose unsecured protected health 
information has been, or is reasonably 
believed to have been, breached. 
Depending on the circumstances, 
business associates could provide the 
covered entity with immediate 
notification of the breach and then 
follow up with the required information 
in § 164.410(c) when available but 
without unreasonable delay and within 
60 days. 
Section 164.410(c)(1) requires 
business associates to provide this 
information ‘‘to the extent possible,’’ 
recognizing that there may be situations 
in which a business associate may be 
unaware of the identification of the 
individuals whose unsecured protected 
health information was breached. For 
example, a business associate that is a 
record storage company that holds 
hundreds of boxes of paper medical 
records on behalf of a covered entity 
may be unaware of the names of the 
individuals whose records are stored. 
Thus, if the business associate discovers 
that several boxes are missing, it may be 
unable to provide the covered entity 
with a list of the individuals whose 
information has been breached. In such 
circumstances, it is not our intent that 
the business associate delay notification 
of the breach to the covered entity, 
when the covered entity may be better 
able to identify the individuals affected. 
Depending on the circumstances 
surrounding a breach of unsecured 
protected health information, a business 
VerDate Mar<15>2010 18:57 Jan 24, 2013 Jkt 229001 PO 00000 Frm 00091 Fmt 4701 Sfmt 4700 E:\FR\FM\25JAR2.SGM 25JAR2sroberts on DSK5SPTVN1PROD with 
--- page 12 ---
5656 Federal Register / Vol. 78, No. 17 / Friday, January 25, 2013 / Rules and Regulations 
associate may be in the best position to 
gather the information the covered 
entity is required by § 164.404(c) to 
include in the notification to the 
individual about the breach. Therefore, 
in addition to the identification of 
affected individuals, § 164.410(c)(2) 
requires a business associate to provide 
the covered entity with any other 
available information that the covered 
entity is required to include in the 
notification to the individual under 
§ 164.404(c), either at the time it 
provides notice to the covered entity of 
the breach or promptly thereafter as 
information becomes available. Because 
we allow this information to be 
provided to a covered entity after the 
initial notification of the breach as it 
becomes available, a business associate 
should not delay the initial notification 
to the covered entity of the breach in 
order to collect information needed for 
the notification to the individual. To 
ensure the covered entity is aware of all 
the available facts surrounding a breach, 
the Rule also requires that a business 
associate provide this information even 
if it becomes available after notifications 
have been sent to affected individuals or 
after the 60-day period specified in 
§ 164.410(b) has elapsed. 
We clarified that business associates 
and covered entities would continue to 
have the flexibility to set forth specific 
obligations for each party, such as who 
will provide notice to individuals and 
when the notification from the business 
associate to the covered entity will be 
required, following a breach of 
unsecured protected health information, 
so long as all required notifications are 
provided and the other requirements of 
the interim final rule were met. We 
encouraged the parties to consider 
which entity is in the best position to 
provide notice to the individual, which 
may depend on circumstances, such as 
the functions the business associate 
performs on behalf of the covered entity 
and which entity has the relationship 
with the individual. We also encouraged 
the parties to ensure the individual does 
not receive notifications from both the 
covered entity and the business 
associate about the same breach, which 
may be confusing to the individual. 
Overview of Public Comments 
Many commenters expressed concern 
over the interim final rule’s treatment of 
a covered entity’s knowledge of a breach 
that occurs at or by a business associate. 
Some commenters stated that a covered 
entity’s knowledge of a breach should 
begin when the business associate 
notifies them of the breach, regardless of 
whether the business associate is an 
agent of the covered entity or a non- 
agent independent contractor. If 
knowledge is imputed when the 
business associate discovers the breach, 
one commenter argued that a covered 
entity would not have sufficient time to 
provide the required notifications to 
individuals in a timely manner. Other 
commenters argued that all business 
associates should be treated as agents of 
the covered entity, such that the 
business associate’s knowledge of a 
breach is imputed to the covered entity. 
Finally, some commenters asked for 
more guidance on when a business 
associate is acting as an agent versus as 
an independent contractor and how to 
determine this status under the Federal 
common law of agency. 
Final Rule 
The final rule modifies § 164.410 only 
to make the following technical and 
non-substantive correction: in paragraph 
(a)(2) of § 164.410, the first sentence is 
revised to refer to paragraph (a)(1) rather 
than paragraph (1). 
With respect to the commenters who 
expressed concern that a covered 
entity’s knowledge of a breach depends 
not only on a business associate’s 
discovery of the breach but also on the 
covered entity’s relationship with the 
business associate, we acknowledge that 
there are many different types of 
relationships that can develop between 
covered entities and business associates 
based upon the function the business 
associate performs on behalf of the 
covered entity. In some situations, a 
business associate will be acting as an 
agent of the covered entity, and as such, 
it makes sense to treat the business 
associate’s knowledge of a breach 
analogous to the knowledge of one of 
the covered entity’s own employees. 
However, in other situations, because a 
business associate may not be an agent 
of the covered entity, it would not be 
reasonable to impute the business 
associate’s knowledge directly to the 
covered entity, and therefore, the 
covered entity’s knowledge depends on 
notification from the business associate. 
Furthermore, the use of the Federal 
common law of agency to determine the 
business associate’s status with respect 
to the covered entity is consistent with 
the approach taken in the Enforcement 
Rule for determining agency liability 
under the HIPAA Rules. Thus, we 
believe the use of the standard is 
appropriate here and should be familiar 
to most entities. We provide additional 
guidance regarding who is an agent 
above in our response to comments on 
the HITECH modifications to the HIPAA 
Enforcement Rule. Because of the 
agency implications on the timing of 
breach notifications, we encourage 
covered entities to discuss and define in 
their business associate agreements the 
requirements regarding how, when, and 
to whom a business associate should 
notify the covered entity of a potential 
breach. 
Response to Other Public Comments 
Comment: Several commenters asked 
OCR to provide sample business 
associate agreement language to outline 
the covered entity’s and business 
associate’s obligations following a 
breach of unsecured protected health 
information. 
Response: A covered entity’s and 
business associate’s obligations 
following a breach of unsecured 
protected health information will vary 
depending on the relationship. For 
example, whether a business associate 
will send the breach notices to affected 
individuals and/or to notify the 
Secretary (and media, if applicable) on 
behalf of a covered entity is a business 
decision of the parties and how quickly 
a business associate is to notify a 
covered entity of a breach within the 
required timeframe may be based on a 
number of factors, such as whether the 
business associate is an agent of the 
covered entity. However, to help 
covered entities and business associates 
implement the new business associate 
agreement requirements generally under 
the HITECH modifications to the HIPAA 
Rules, the Department has published 
sample business associate agreement 
provisions on its web site. 
Comment: Some commenters asked 
what happens if a covered entity and a 
business associate disagree about 
whether an impermissible use or 
disclosure is a breach that requires 
notification. These commenters asked if 
both parties must be in agreement before 
breach notification obligations are 
triggered. 
Response: The covered entity is 
ultimately responsible for providing 
individuals with notification of 
breaches and, as indicated above, the 
clock for notifying individuals of 
breaches begins upon knowledge of the 
incident, even if it is not yet clear 
whether the incident qualifies as a 
breach for purposes of this rule. Further, 
this final rule clarifies that the default 
presumption is that an impermissible 
use or disclosure is a breach unless it 
can be determined through a risk 
assessment that there is a low 
probability that the data may be 
compromised. This standard should 
allow for more uniform application of 
the risk assessment approach across 
covered entities and business associates. 
Comment: One commenter stated that 
the requirement that a business 
VerDate Mar<15>2010 18:57 Jan 24, 2013 Jkt 229001 PO 00000 Frm 00092 Fmt 4701 Sfmt 4700 E:\FR\FM\25JAR2.SGM 25JAR2sroberts on DSK5SPTVN1PROD with 
--- page 13 ---
5657 Federal Register / Vol. 78, No. 17 / Friday, January 25, 2013 / Rules and Regulations 
associate notify a covered entity of a 
breach of unsecured protected health 
information is duplicative of a business 
associate’s other obligations to notify 
the covered entity of privacy violations 
and security incidents. 
Response: Business associates are 
required to report to covered entities 
any security incidents or uses or 
disclosures of protected health 
information not provided for by their 
business associate agreements, which 
include but are broader than breaches of 
unsecured protected health information 
under this Rule. For example, a security 
incident need not lead to unauthorized 
access to protected health information 
(and thus, is not a breach) but is still an 
event that should be reported to the 
covered entity. Further, when a security 
incident occurs that does rise to the 
level of a breach, the breach notice to 
the covered entity suffices to meet the 
requirement to report the security 
incident to the covered entity (however, 
a covered entity may require through 
the business associate agreement that 
additional information be reported). 
Therefore, these requirements are not 
duplicative. 
6. Law Enforcement Delay 
Interim Final Rule 
Section 13402(g) of the HITECH Act 
provides that if a law enforcement 
official determines that a notification, 
notice, or posting required under this 
section would impede a criminal 
investigation or cause damage to 
national security, such notification, 
notice, or posting shall be delayed in the 
same manner as provided under 45 CFR 
164.528(a)(2) of the Privacy Rule in the 
case of a disclosure covered under such 
section. Section 164.412 implements 
section 13402(g) of the Act, requiring a 
covered entity or business associate to 
temporarily delay notification to the 
individual, the media (if applicable), to 
a covered entity by a business associate, 
and to the Secretary if instructed to do 
so by a law enforcement official. 
Section 164.412(a), based on the 
requirements of 45 CFR 164.528(a)(2)(i) 
of the Privacy Rule, provides for a 
temporary delay of notification in 
situations in which a law enforcement 
official provides a statement in writing 
that the delay is necessary because 
notification would impede a criminal 
investigation or cause damage to 
national security, and specifies the time 
for which a delay is required. In such 
instances, the covered entity is required 
to delay the notification, notice, or 
posting for the time period specified by 
the official. 
Similarly, § 164.412(b), based on 45 
CFR 164.528(a)(2)(ii) of the Privacy 
Rule, requires a covered entity or 
business associate to temporarily delay 
a notification, notice, or posting if a law 
enforcement official states orally that a 
notification would impede a criminal 
investigation or cause damage to 
national security. However, in this case, 
the covered entity or business associate 
must document the statement and the 
identity of the official and delay 
notification for no longer than 30 days, 
unless a written statement meeting the 
above requirements is provided during 
that time. We interpreted these 
provisions as tolling the time within 
which notification is required under 
§§ 164.404, 164.406, 164.408, and 
164.410, as applicable. 
Final Rule 
The Department did not receive 
public comments on this provision of 
the interim final rule. We retain 
§ 164.412 in this final rule without 
modification. 
7. Section 164.414—Administrative 
Requirements and Burden of Proof 
Interim Final Rule 
Section 164.414(a) requires covered 
entities to comply with the 
administrative requirements of 
§ 164.530(b), (d), (e), (g), (h), (i), and (j) 
of the Privacy Rule with respect to the 
breach notification provisions of this 
subpart. These Privacy Rule provisions, 
for example, require covered entities 
and business associates to develop and 
document policies and procedures, train 
workforce members on and have 
sanctions for failure to comply with 
these policies and procedures, permit 
individuals to file complaints regarding 
these policies and procedures or a 
failure to comply with them, and 
require covered entities to refrain from 
intimidating or retaliatory acts. Thus, a 
covered entity is required to consider 
and incorporate the breach notification 
requirements with respect to its 
administrative compliance and other 
obligations. 
Section 164.414(b) provides that, 
following an impermissible use or 
disclosure under the Privacy Rule, 
covered entities and business associates 
have the burden of demonstrating that 
all notifications were made as required 
by this subpart. Additionally, as part of 
demonstrating that all required 
notifications were made, a covered 
entity or business associate, as 
applicable, also must be able to 
demonstrate that an impermissible use 
or disclosure did not constitute a 
breach, as such term is defined at 
§ 164.402, in cases where the covered 
entity or business associate determined 
that notifications were not required. To 
conform to these provisions, § 160.534 
of the HIPAA Enforcement Rule makes 
clear that, during any administrative 
hearing, the covered entity has the 
burden of going forward and the burden 
of persuasion with respect to these 
issues. 
Thus, when a covered entity or 
business associate knows of an 
impermissible use or disclosure of 
protected health information, it should 
maintain documentation that all 
required notifications were made, or, 
alternatively, to demonstrate that 
notification was not required: (1) Its risk 
assessment (discussed above in 
§ 164.402) demonstrating a low 
probability that the protected health 
information has been compromised by 
the impermissible use or disclosure or 
(2) the application of any other 
exceptions to the definition of ‘‘breach.’’ 
Overview of Public Comments 
One commenter stated that it is 
critical that all employees are trained 
and knowledgeable about what 
constitutes a breach, so that the covered 
entity or business associate can provide 
the required notifications within the 
required timeframe. The commenter 
also maintained that OCR should 
emphasize the necessity of this training. 
With respect to the burden of proof 
placed upon covered entities and 
business associates, one commenter 
agreed that covered entities and 
business associates should have the 
burden to demonstrate that all 
notifications were provided following a 
breach of unsecured protected health 
information. However, the commenter 
asked that we include a presumption 
that an impermissible use or disclosure 
of protected health information did not 
constitute a breach if a covered entity or 
business associate has implemented a 
breach notification policy, completed a 
risk assessment, and documented that it 
followed its policy in reaching a 
conclusion that breach notification was 
not required. 
Final Rule 
We retain § 164.414 in this final rule 
without modification. We emphasize 
the importance of ensuring that all 
workforce members are appropriately 
trained and knowledgeable about what 
constitutes a breach and on the policies 
and procedures for reporting, analyzing, 
and documenting a possible breach of 
unsecured protected health information. 
We note that because this final rule 
modifies the definition of breach as 
stated in the interim final rule, covered 
VerDate Mar<15>2010 18:57 Jan 24, 2013 Jkt 229001 PO 00000 Frm 00093 Fmt 4701 Sfmt 4700 E:\FR\FM\25JAR2.SGM 25JAR2sroberts on DSK5SPTVN1PROD with 
--- page 14 ---
5658 Federal Register / Vol. 78, No. 17 / Friday, January 25, 2013 / Rules and Regulations 
entities will need to update their 
policies and procedures and retrain 
workforce members as necessary to 
reflect such modifications. 
With respect to this burden of proof, 
section 13402 of the statute places the 
burden of proof on a covered entity or 
business associate, if applicable, to 
demonstrate that all notifications were 
made as required. Therefore, section 
164.530(j)(1)(iv) requires covered 
entities to maintain documentation to 
meet this burden of proof. This includes 
documentation that all required 
notifications have been provided or that 
no breach occurred and notification was 
not necessary. If a covered entity’s 
determination with respect to whether a 
breach occurred is called into question, 
the covered entity should produce the 
documentation that demonstrates the 
reasonableness of its conclusions based 
on the findings of its risk assessment. 
8. Technical Corrections 
The interim final rule made several 
technical changes to align the HIPAA 
Rules in light of the new breach 
notification requirements of subpart D. 
See 74 FR 42755–56. We did not receive 
comments on these changes. We retain 
the technical corrections made in the 
interim final rule and also make an 
additional technical correction by 
adding ‘‘and’’ to the end of 
§ 160.534(b)(1)(iii) to make clear the 
relationship between § 160.534(b)(1)(iii) 
and the new § 160.534(b)(1)(iv). 
9. Preemption 
Interim Final Rule 
The interim final rule clarified that 
contrary State law will be preempted by 
these breach notification regulations. 
Section 1178 of the Social Security Act, 
42 U.S.C. 1320d–7, which was added by 
HIPAA, provides that HIPAA 
administrative simplification provisions 
generally preempt conflicting State law. 
Section 160.203 states that a standard, 
requirement, or implementation 
specification that is adopted as 
regulation at 45 CFR parts 160, 162, or 
164 and that is ‘‘contrary to a provision 
of State law preempts the provision of 
State law.’’ Thus, whether a State law is 
contrary to these breach notification 
regulations is to be determined based on 
the definition of ‘‘contrary’’ at § 160.202, 
which states that a State law is contrary 
if ‘‘[a] covered entity would find it 
impossible to comply with both the 
State and Federal requirements’’ or if 
the State law ‘‘stands as an obstacle to 
the accomplishment and execution of 
the full purposes and objectives’’ of the 
breach notification provisions in the 
Act. Covered entities must analyze 
relevant State laws with respect to the 
breach requirements to understand the 
interaction and apply this preemption 
standard appropriately. 
In the interim final rule, we stated our 
belief that, in general, covered entities 
can comply with both the applicable 
State laws and this regulation and that 
in most cases, a single notification can 
satisfy the notification requirements 
under State laws and this regulation. 
For example, if a State breach 
notification law requires notification be 
sent to the individual in a shorter time 
frame than is required by this 
regulation, a covered entity that sends 
the notice within the time frame 
required by the State law will also be in 
compliance with this regulation’s 
timeliness requirements. 
Additionally, since the Act and rule 
are flexible in terms of how the 
elements are to be described, and do not 
prohibit additional elements from being 
included in the notice, in general, 
Federal requirements contain flexibility 
for covered entities to develop a notice 
that satisfies both laws. 
Overview of Public Comments 
While some commenters were pleased 
that the breach notification rule 
preempts conflicting State law, other 
commenters expressed confusion or 
concern with this preemption standard. 
Many commenters stated that despite 
the fact that in most cases a covered 
entity may only need to provide one 
notification to satisfy both State and 
Federal law, there will be some cases in 
which a covered entity will have to 
provide multiple notices to the same 
individual to ensure compliance with 
all relevant laws. This will result in 
confusion for the individual and 
increased costs for the covered entity. 
Some of these commenters suggested 
that this Federal breach notification law 
should preempt all State breach 
notification laws, or alternatively, that 
HHS should work with Congress and 
the States to harmonize the breach 
notification laws such that only one 
notice is required following a breach. 
Final Rule 
We maintain the preemption standard 
discussed in the interim final rule, 
which is based on section 1128 of the 
Social Security Act and applies to the 
HITECH Act’s breach notification 
provisions by virtue of section 13421 of 
the HITECH Act. We continue to believe 
that, generally, covered entities are able 
to comply with both State and Federal 
requirements for providing breach 
notification with one breach notice 
based on the flexibility provided to 
entities in this Rule. However, even in 
the exceptional case, we do not have 
authority to preempt a State breach 
notification law that is not contrary to 
this Rule. 
10. Responses to Other Public 
Comments 
Comment: One commenter asked 
whether penalties are automatically 
assessed following a violation of the 
breach notification rule or if this is done 
at OCR’s discretion and whether civil 
money penalties can be assessed for the 
underlying cause of a breach of 
unsecured protected health information 
where a covered entity has provided all 
required breach notifications. 
Response: OCR’s enforcement of the 
breach notification rule will be carried 
out pursuant to the Enforcement Rule. 
Pursuant to the Enforcement Rule, OCR 
may impose a civil money penalty for a 
failure to comply with the breach 
notification rule. OCR also has the 
discretion to work with the covered 
entity to achieve voluntary compliance 
through informal resolution, except in 
cases in which it has found a violation 
due to willful neglect. Because every 
breach of unsecured protected health 
information must have an underlying 
impermissible use or disclosure under 
the Privacy Rule, OCR also has the 
authority to impose a civil money 
penalty for the underlying Privacy Rule 
violation, even in cases where all 
required breach notifications were 
provided. 
VI. Modifications to the HIPAA Privacy 
Rule Under GINA 
A. Background 
The Genetic Information 
Nondiscrimination Act of 2008 
(‘‘GINA’’), Public Law 110–233, 122 
Stat. 881, prohibits discrimination based 
on an individual’s genetic information 
in both the health coverage and 
employment contexts. With respect to 
health coverage, Title I of GINA 
generally prohibits discrimination in 
premiums or contributions for group 
coverage based on genetic information, 
proscribes the use of genetic 
information as a basis for determining 
eligibility or setting premiums in the 
individual and Medicare supplemental 
(Medigap) insurance markets, and limits 
the ability of group health plans, health 
insurance issuers, and Medigap issuers 
to collect genetic information or to 
request or require that individuals 
undergo genetic testing. Title II of GINA 
generally prohibits use of genetic 
information in the employment context, 
restricts employers and other entities 
covered by Title II from requesting, 
requiring, or purchasing genetic 
VerDate Mar<15>2010 18:57 Jan 24, 2013 Jkt 229001 PO 00000 Frm 00094 Fmt 4701 Sfmt 4700 E:\FR\FM\25JAR2.SGM 25JAR2sroberts on DSK5SPTVN1PROD with 