
--- page 1 ---
2 Security Standards: Administrative Safeguards 
 
Volume 2 / Paper 2 3 5/2005: rev. 3/2007  
STANDARD
§ 164.308(a)(1)
NOTE:  For a more detailed 
discussion of “addressable” and 
“required” implementation 
specifications, see the first 
paper in this series, “Security 
101 for Covered Entities.” 
security controls already in place, an accurate and thorough risk analysis, and a series of 
documented solutions derived from a number of factors unique to each covered entity. 
 
Security Management Process 
 
The first standard under Administrative Safeguards section is the Security Management Process. 
This standard requires covered entities to: 
 
“Implement policies and procedures to prevent, detect, contain and 
correct security violations.”
 
The purpose of this standard is to establish the administrative processes and procedures that a 
covered entity will use to implement the security program in its environment.  There are four 
implementation specifications in the Security Management Process standard. 
 
1. Risk Analysis (Required) 
2. Risk Management (Required) 
3. Sanction Policy (Required) 
4. Information System Activity Review 
(Required) 
 
The Importance of Risk Analysis and Risk Management  
Risk analysis and risk management are critical to a covered entity’s Security Rule compliance 
efforts. Both are standard information security processes that have already been adopted by some 
organizations within the health care industry. 
 
As stated in the responses to public comment in the preamble to the Security Rule, the Security 
Management Process standard and associated implementation specifications “form the 
foundation upon which an entity’s necessary security activities are built.” The results from the 
risk analysis and risk management processes will become the baseline for security processes 
within covered entities. 
 
This paper provides a general understanding of risk analysis 
and risk management concepts and processes. CMS will 
include a more detailed discussion of risk analysis and risk 
management in paper 6 in the HIPAA Security Series titled, 
“Basics of Risk Analysis and Risk Management.”  
 
NOTE: Risk analysis and risk 
management serve as tools to 
assist in the development of a 
covered entity’s strategy to 
protect the confidentiality, 
integrity, and availability of 
EPHI. 
--- page 2 ---
2 Security Standards: Administrative Safeguards 
 
Volume 2 / Paper 2 4 5/2005: rev. 3/2007  
1.  RISK ANALYSIS (R) - § 164.308(a)(1)(ii)(A) 
The Risk Analysis implementation specification requires covered entities to: 
 
“Conduct an accurate and thorough assessment of the potential risks and 
vulnerabilities to the confidentiality, integrity, and availability of 
electronic protected health information held by the covered entity.” 
 
In general, a risk analysis can be viewed as: 
 
 The process of identifying potential security risks, and  
 
 Determining the probability of occurrence and magnitude of risks. 
 
Sample questions for covered entities to consider: 
 How does EPHI flow throughout the organization? This includes EPHI that 
is created, received, maintained or transmitted by the covered entity. 
 
 What are the less obvious sources of EPHI? Has the organization considered 
portable devices like PDAs? 
 
 What are the external sources of EPHI? For example, do vendors or 
consultants create, receive, maintain or transmit EPHI? 
 
 What are the human, natural, and environmental threats to information 
systems that contain EPHI? 
 
2.  RISK MANAGEMENT (R) - § 164.308(a)(1)(ii)(B) 
Risk Management is a required implementation specification. It requires an organization 
to make decisions about how to address security risks and vulnerabilities. The Risk 
Management implementation specification states that covered entities must: 
 
“Implement security measures sufficient to reduce risks and 
vulnerabilities to a reasonable and appropriate level to comply with 
§164.306(a).”  
 
Risk management is the process used to identify and implement security measures to 
reduce risk to a reasonable and appropriate level within the covered entity based on the 
covered entity’s circumstances. The measures implemented to comply with this required 
implementation specification must also allow the covered entity to comply with § 
--- page 3 ---
2 Security Standards: Administrative Safeguards 
 
Volume 2 / Paper 2 5 5/2005: rev. 3/2007  
164.306(a) of the Security Standards: General Rules. Covered entities will want to 
answer some basic questions when planning their risk management process. 
 
Sample questions for covered entities to consider: 
 What security measures are already in place to protect EPHI (i.e., 
safeguards)? 
 
 Is executive leadership and/or management involved in risk management 
and mitigation decisions? 
 
 Are security processes being communicated throughout the organization? 
 
 Does the covered entity need to engage other resources to assist in risk 
management? 
 
In general, a covered entity will want to make sure its 
risk management strategy takes into account the 
characteristics of its environment including the 
factors at § 164.306(b)(2), which are listed on page 2 
of this paper. These factors will help the covered 
entity to determine what potential security measures 
are reasonable and appropriate for its environment. 
 
3.  SANCTION POLICY (R) - § 164.308(a)(1)(ii)(C) 
Another implementation specification in the Security Management Process is the 
Sanction Policy. It requires covered entities to: 
 
“Apply appropriate sanctions against workforce members who fail to 
comply with the security policies and procedures of the covered entity.” 
 
Appropriate sanctions must be in place so that workforce members understand the 
consequences of failing to comply with security policies and procedures, to deter 
noncompliance. 
 
Sample questions for covered entities to consider: 
 Does the covered entity have existing sanction policies and procedures to 
meet the requirements of this implementation specification? If not, can 
NOTE:  Covered entities must 
ensure that the risk analysis 
and risk management 
processes are on-going and 
dynamic processes that can 
change as the environment or 
operations change. 
--- page 4 ---
2 Security Standards: Administrative Safeguards 
 
Volume 2 / Paper 2 6 5/2005: rev. 3/2007  
existing sanction policies be modified to include language relating to 
violations of these policies and procedures? 
 
 Does the organization require employees to sign a statement of adherence to 
security policy and procedures (e.g., as part of the employee handbook or 
confidentiality statement) as a prerequisite to employment? 
 
 Does the statement of adherence to 
security policies and procedures state 
that the workforce member 
acknowledges that violations of security 
policies and procedures may lead to 
disciplinary action, for example, up to 
and including termination? 
 
 Does the sanction policy provide examples of potential violations of policy 
and procedures?  
 
 Does the sanction policy adjust the disciplinary action based on the severity 
of the violation?  
 
4.  INFORMATION SYSTEM ACTIVITY REVIEW (R) - § 164.308(a)(1)(ii)(D) 
The Security Management Process standard also includes the Information System 
Activity Review implementation specification.  This required implementation 
specification states that covered entities must: 
 
“Implement procedures to regularly review records of information system 
activity, such as audit logs, access reports, and security incident tracking 
reports.” 
 
The information system activity review enables covered entities to determine if any EPHI 
is used or disclosed in an inappropriate manner.  
 
Information system activity review procedures may be different for each covered entity. 
The procedure should be customized to meet the covered entity’s risk management 
strategy and take into account the capabilities of all information systems with EPHI.   
 
NOTE: A covered entity’s 
sanction policy should reinforce 
its security policies and 
procedures. 
--- page 5 ---
2 Security Standards: Administrative Safeguards 
 
Volume 2 / Paper 2 7 5/2005: rev. 3/2007  
STANDARD 
§ 164.308(a)(2)
NOTE: The Information 
System Activity Review 
implementation specification 
should also promote continual 
awareness of any information 
system activity that could 
suggest a security incident. 
Sample questions for covered entities to consider: 
 What are the audit and activity review functions of the current information 
systems? 
 
 Are the information systems functions 
adequately used and monitored to 
promote continual awareness of 
information system activity? 
 
 What logs or reports are generated by 
the information systems? 
 
 Is there a policy that establishes what reviews will be conducted? 
 
 Is there a procedure that describes specifics of the reviews? 
 
Assigned Security Responsibility  
 
The second standard in the Administrative Safeguards section is Assigned Security 
Responsibility. There are no separate implementation specifications for this standard. The 
standard requires that covered entities: 
 
“Identify the security official who is responsible for the development and 
implementation of the policies and procedures required by this subpart 
[the Security Rule] for the entity.” 
 
The purpose of this standard is to identify who will be operationally responsible for assuring that 
the covered entity complies with the Security Rule. Covered entities should be aware of the 
following when assigning security responsibility: 
 
 This requirement is comparable to the Privacy Rule standard at 
§164.530(a)(1), Personnel Designations, which requires all covered entities to 
designate a Privacy Official.   
 
 The Security Official and Privacy Official can be the same person, but are not 
required to be. 
 
--- page 6 ---
2 Security Standards: Administrative Safeguards 
 
Volume 2 / Paper 2 8 5/2005: rev. 3/2007  
STANDARD 
§ 164.308(a)(3)
 While one individual must be designated as having overall responsibility, 
other individuals in the covered entity may be assigned specific security 
responsibilities (e.g., facility security or network security).   
 
When making this decision covered entities should consider some basic questions. 
 
Sample questions for covered entities to consider: 
 Would it serve the organization’s needs to designate the same individual as 
both the Privacy and Security Official (for example, in a small provider 
office)? 
 
 Has the organization agreed upon, and clearly identified and documented, 
the responsibilities of the Security Official?   
 
 How are the roles and responsibilities of the Security Official crafted to 
reflect the size, complexity and technical capabilities of the organization? 
 
Workforce Security 
 
The third standard is Workforce Security, which states that covered entities must: 
 
“Implement policies and procedures to ensure that all members of its 
workforce have appropriate access to electronic protected health 
information, as provided under [the Information Access Management 
standard], and to prevent those workforce members who do not have 
access under [the Information Access Management standard] from 
obtaining access to electronic protected health information.” 
Within a covered entity’s environment, workforce members that need access to EPHI to carry 
out their duties must be identified. For each workforce member, or job function, the covered 
entity must identify the EPHI that is needed, when it is needed, and make reasonable efforts to 
control access to the EPHI. This will also include identification of the computer systems and 
applications that provide access to the EPHI. Covered entities must provide only the minimum 
necessary access to EPHI that is required for a workforce member to do his or her job. 
Within Workforce Security there are three addressable implementation specifications. 
 
1. Authorization and/or Supervision (Addressable) 
--- page 7 ---
2 Security Standards: Administrative Safeguards 
 
Volume 2 / Paper 2 9 5/2005: rev. 3/2007  
2. Workforce Clearance Procedure (Addressable) 
3. Termination Procedures (Addressable) 
 
1.  AUTHORIZATION AND/OR SUPERVISION (A) – § 164.308(a)(3)(ii)(A) 
Where the Authorization and/or Supervision implementation specification is a reasonable 
and appropriate safeguard for a covered entity, the covered entity must: 
 
“Implement procedures for the authorization and/or supervision of 
workforce members who work with electronic protected health 
information or in locations where it might be accessed.” 
 
Authorization is the process of determining whether a particular user (or a computer 
system) has the right to carry out a certain activity, such as reading a file or running a 
program. Implementation of this addressable implementation specification will vary 
among covered entities, depending upon the size and complexity of the workforce, and 
the information systems that contain EPHI. For 
example, in a very small provider office, all staff 
members may need to access all EPHI in their 
information system, since they may perform multiple 
functions. In this case, the covered entity might 
document the reasons for implementing policies and 
procedures allowing this kind of global access. If the 
documented rationale is reasonable and appropriate, 
this may be an acceptable approach. 
 
To determine the most reasonable and appropriate authorization and/or supervision 
procedures, covered entities may want to ask some basic questions about existing policies 
and procedures.   
 
Sample questions for covered entities to consider: 
 Are detailed job descriptions used to determine what level of access the 
person holding the position should have to EPHI? 
 
 Who has or should have the authority to determine who can access EPHI, 
e.g., supervisors or managers? 
 
 Are there similar existing processes used for paper records that could be 
used as an example for the EPHI? 
 
NOTE:  The Authorization 
and/or Supervision 
implementation specification 
provides the necessary checks 
and balances to ensure that all 
members of the workforce have 
appropriate access (or, in some 
cases, no access) to EPHI.   
--- page 8 ---
2 Security Standards: Administrative Safeguards 
 
Volume 2 / Paper 2 10  5/2005: rev. 3/2007  
Covered entities should review the authorization and supervision policies already present 
in the organization’s current operating environment. Depending on the existing policies, 
covered entities may need to reinforce them, make modifications for EPHI, and/or 
develop corresponding documentation.   
 
2.  WORKFORCE CLEARANCE PROCEDURE (A) - § 164.308(a)(3)(ii)(B) 
Covered entities need to address whether all members of the workforce with authorized 
access to EPHI receive appropriate clearances. Where the Workforce Clearance 
Procedure implementation specification is a reasonable and appropriate safeguard for a 
covered entity, the covered entity must:  
 
“Implement procedures to determine that the access of a workforce 
member to electronic protected health information is appropriate.” 
 
In other words, the clearance process must establish the procedures to verify that a 
workforce member does in fact have the appropriate access for their job function. A 
covered entity may choose to perform this type of screening procedure separate from or 
as a part of the authorization and/or supervision procedure. 
 
Sample questions for covered entities to consider: 
 Are there existing procedures for determining that the appropriate workforce 
members have access to the necessary information? 
 
 Are the procedures used consistently within the organization when 
determining access of related workforce job functions? 
 
3.  TERMINATION PROCEDURES (A) - § 164.308(a)(3)(ii)(C) 
Where the Termination Procedures implementation specification is a reasonable and 
appropriate safeguard for a covered entity, the covered entity must: 
 
“Implement procedures for terminating access to electronic protected 
health information when the employment of a workforce member ends or 
as required by determinations made as specified in paragraph 
(a)(3)(ii)(B) [the Workforce Clearance Procedure] of this section.” 
 
Termination procedures must be implemented to remove access privileges when an 
employee, contractor, or other individual previously entitled to access information no 
longer has these privileges.  Whether the employee leaves the organization voluntarily or 
involuntarily, procedures to terminate access must be in place. 
 
--- page 9 ---
2 Security Standards: Administrative Safeguards 
 
Volume 2 / Paper 2 11  5/2005: rev. 3/2007  
STANDARD 
§ 164.308(a)(4)
The same process that is implemented for termination should also be used to change 
access levels if an employee’s job description changes to require more or less access to 
EPHI. The procedures should also address the complexity of the organization and the 
sophistication of associated information systems. 
 
Sample questions for covered entities to consider: 
 Do the termination policies and procedures assign responsibility for 
removing information system and/or physical access?   
 
 Do the policies and procedures include timely communication of 
termination actions to insure that the termination procedures are 
appropriately followed?   
 
Information Access Management 
The fourth standard in the Administrative Safeguards section is Information Access 
Management. Covered entities are required to: 
 
“Implement policies and procedures for authorizing access to electronic 
protected health information that are consistent with the applicable 
requirements of subpart E of this part [the Privacy Rule].” 
Restricting access to only those persons and entities with a 
need for access is a basic tenet of security. By implementing 
this standard, the risk of inappropriate disclosure, alteration, 
or destruction of EPHI is minimized. Covered entities must 
determine those persons and/or entities that need access to 
EPHI within their environment. 
 
Compliance with this standard should support a covered 
entity’s compliance with the HIPAA Privacy Rule minimum necessary requirements, which 
requires covered entities to evaluate their practices and enhance safeguards as needed to limit 
unnecessary or inappropriate access to and disclosure of protected health information. To better 
understand this standard, covered entities should review the minimum necessary standard of the 
HIPAA Privacy Rule. See 45 CFR 164.502(b) and 164.514(d). 
 
The Information Access Management standard has three implementation specifications.  
 
1. Isolating Health Care Clearinghouse Functions (Required) 
NOTE:  The Information 
Access Management 
implementation specifications 
are closely related to the 
implementation specifications 
under the Workforce Security 
standard. 
--- page 10 ---
2 Security Standards: Administrative Safeguards 
 
Volume 2 / Paper 2 12  5/2005: rev. 3/2007  
2. Access Authorization (Addressable) 
3. Access Establishment and Modification (Addressable) 
 
1.  ISOLATING HEALTH CARE CLEARINGHOUSE FUNCTIONS (R) –  
§ 164.308(a)(4)(ii)(A) 
The Isolating Health Care Clearinghouse Functions implementation specification states: 
 
“If a health care clearinghouse is part of a larger organization, the 
clearinghouse must implement policies and procedures that protect the 
electronic protected health information of the clearinghouse from 
unauthorized access by the larger organization.” 
 
This implementation specification only applies in the situation where a health care 
clearinghouse is part of a larger organization. In these situations, the health care 
clearinghouse is responsible for protecting the EPHI that it is processing. 
 
Sample questions for covered entities to consider: 
 Does the larger organization perform health care clearinghouse functions? 
 
 If health care clearinghouse functions are performed, are policies and 
procedures implemented to protect EPHI from the other functions of the 
larger organization? 
 
 Are additional technical safeguards needed to separate EPHI in information 
systems, used by the health care clearinghouse, to protect against 
unauthorized access by the larger organization? 
 
2.  ACCESS AUTHORIZATION (A) - § 164.308(a)(4)(ii)(B) 
In the Workforce Security standard portion of this paper, authorization was defined as the 
act of determining whether a particular user (or computer system) has the right, based on 
job function or responsibilities, to carry out a certain activity, such as reading a file or 
running a program.  Where this implementation standard is a reasonable and appropriate 
safeguard for a covered entity, the covered entity must: 
 
“Implement policies and procedures for granting access to electronic 
protected health information, for example, through access to a 
workstation, transaction, program, process, or other mechanism.” 
 
--- page 11 ---
2 Security Standards: Administrative Safeguards 
 
Volume 2 / Paper 2 13  5/2005: rev. 3/2007  
Once the covered entity has determined that the person or system is authorized, there are 
numerous ways to grant access to EPHI. In general, a covered entity’s policies and 
procedures must identify who has authority to grant access privileges. It must also state 
the process for granting access. To create and document policies and procedures to grant 
access, covered entities should address the following questions. 
 
Sample questions for covered entities to consider: 
 How is authorization documented? How can it be used to grant access?  
 
 Are the policies and procedures for granting access consistent with 
applicable requirements of the Privacy Rule? 
 
 Have appropriate authorization and clearance procedures, as specified in 
workforce security, been performed prior to granting access? 
 
 Are access rules specific to applications and business requirements? For 
example, do different workforce members require different levels of access 
based on job function? 
 
 Is there a technical process in place, such as creating unique user name and 
an authentication process, when granting access to a workforce member? 
 
Once a covered entity has clearly defined who should get access to what EPHI and under 
what circumstances, it must consider how access is established and modified. 
 
3.  ACCESS ESTABLISHMENT AND MODIFICATION (A) -  
§ 164.308(a)(4)(ii)(C) 
Where the Access Establishment and Modification implementation specification is a 
reasonable and appropriate safeguard for a covered entity, the covered entity must: 
 
“Implement policies and procedures that, based upon the entity’s access 
authorization policies, establish, document, review, and modify a user’s 
right of access to a workstation, transaction, program, or process.” 
 
This means that a covered entity must implement and manage the creation and 
modification of access privileges to workstations, transactions, programs or processes. 
Responsibility for this function may be assigned to a specific individual or individuals, 
which also may be responsible for terminating access privileges for workforce members. 
--- page 12 ---
2 Security Standards: Administrative Safeguards 
 
Volume 2 / Paper 2 14  5/2005: rev. 3/2007  
STANDARD 
§ 164.308(a)(5)
Covered entities must evaluate existing procedures, update them (if needed), and 
document procedures as necessary. 
 
Sample questions for covered entities to consider: 
 Are policies and procedures in place for establishing access and modifying 
access?  
 
 Are system access policies and procedures documented and updated as 
necessary? 
 
 Do members of management or other workforce members periodically 
review the list of persons with access to EPHI to ensure they are valid and 
consistent with those authorized?  
 
Security Awareness and Training 
 
Regardless of the Administrative Safeguards a covered entity implements, those safeguards will 
not protect the EPHI if the workforce is unaware of its role in adhering to and enforcing them. 
Many security risks and vulnerabilities within covered entities are internal.  This is why the next 
standard, Security Awareness and Training, is so important. 
 
Specifically, the Security Awareness and Training standard states that covered entities must: 
 
“Implement a security awareness and training program for all members of 
its workforce (including management).” 
 
Security training for all new and existing members of the covered entity’s workforce is required 
by the compliance date of the Security Rule.  In addition, periodic retraining should be given 
whenever environmental or operational changes affect the security of EPHI. Changes may 
include: new or updated policies and procedures; new or upgraded software or hardware; new 
security technology; or even changes in the Security Rule.  
 
The Security Awareness and Training standard has four implementation specifications.  
 
1. Security Reminders (Addressable) 
2. Protection from Malicious Software (Addressable) 
3. Log-in Monitoring (Addressable) 
4. Password Management (Addressable) 
--- page 13 ---
2 Security Standards: Administrative Safeguards 
 
Volume 2 / Paper 2 15  5/2005: rev. 3/2007  
NOTE:  Covered entities must 
document the security 
reminders they implement. 
Documentation could include 
the type of reminder, its 
message, and the date it was 
implemented. 
 
1.  SECURITY REMINDERS (A) - § 164.308(a)(5)(ii)(A) 
Where this implementation specification is a reasonable and appropriate safeguard for a 
covered entity, the covered entity must implement: 
 
“Periodic security updates.” 
 
There are many types of security reminders that 
covered entities may choose to implement. Examples 
might include notices in printed or electronic form, 
agenda items and specific discussion topics at 
monthly meetings, focused reminders posted in 
affected areas, as well as formal retraining on security 
policies and procedures. Covered entities should look 
at how they currently remind the workforce of current 
policies and procedures, and then decide whether these practices are reasonable and 
appropriate or if other forms of security reminders are needed. 
2.  PROTECTION FROM MALICIOUS SOFTWARE (A) - § 164.308(a)(5)(ii)(B) 
One important security measure that employees may need to be reminded of is security 
software that is used to protect against malicious software.  Where this implementation 
specification is a reasonable and appropriate safeguard for a covered entity, the covered 
entity must implement: 
 
“Procedures for guarding against, detecting, and reporting malicious 
software.” 
 
Malicious software can be thought of as any program 
that harms information systems, such as viruses, 
Trojan horses or worms. As a result of an 
unauthorized infiltration, EPHI and other data can be 
damaged or destroyed, or at a minimum, require 
expensive and time-consuming repairs. 
 
Malicious software is frequently brought into an organization through email attachments, 
and programs that are downloaded from the Internet. Under the Security Awareness and 
Training standard, the workforce must also be trained regarding its role in protecting 
against malicious software, and system protection capabilities. It is important to note that 
training must be an ongoing process for all organizations. 
 
NOTE:  Malicious software that 
successfully invades 
information systems can cause 
significant damage. 
--- page 14 ---
   
Posted July 14, 2010 Page 1
 
 
Introduction 
 
The Office for Civil Rights (OCR) is responsible for issuing annual guidance on the 
provisions in the HIPAA Security Rule.1  (45 C.F.R. §§ 164.302 – 318.)  This series of 
guidances will assist organizations2 in identifying and implementing the most effective 
and appropriate administrative, physical, and technical safeguards to secure electronic 
protected health information (e-PHI). The guidance materials will be developed with 
input from stakeholders and the public, and will be updated as appropriate. 
 
We begin the series with the risk analysis requirement in § 164.308(a)(1)(ii)(A).  
Conducting a risk analysis is the first step in identifying and implementing safeguards 
that comply with and carry out the standards and implementation specifications in the 
Security Rule.  Therefore, a risk analysis is foundational, and must be understood in 
detail before OCR can issue meaningful guidance that specifically addresses safeguards 
and technologies that will best protect electronic health information.   
 
The guidance is not intended to provide a one-size-fits-all blueprint for compliance with 
the risk analysis requirement. Rather, it clarifies the expectations of the Department for 
organizations working to meet these requirements.
3 An organization should determine the 
most appropriate way to achieve compliance, taking into account the characteristics of 
the organization and its environment.  
 
We note that some of the content contained in this guidance is based on recommendations 
of the National Institute of Standards and Technology (NIST). NIST, a federal agency, 
publishes freely available material in the public domain, including guidelines.
4 Although 
only federal agencies are required to follow guidelines set by NIST, the guidelines 
represent the industry standard for good business practices with respect to standards for 
securing e-PHI. Therefore, non-federal organizations may find their content valuable 
when developing and performing compliance activities.    
 
All e-PHI created, received, maintained or transmitted by an organization is subject to the 
Security Rule. The Security Rule requires entities to evaluate risks and vulnerabilities in 
their environments and to implement reasonable and appropriate security measures to 
                                                
 
1 Section 13401(c) of the Health Information Technology for Economic and Clinical (HITECH) Act. 
2  As used in this guidance the term “organizations” refers to covered entities and business associates. The 
guidance will be updated following implementation of the final HITECH regulations.      
3 The HIPAA Security Rule: Health Insurance Reform: Security Standards, February 20, 2003, 68 FR 8334. 
4 The 800 Series of Special Publications (SP) are available on the Office for Civil Rights’ website – 
specifically, SP 800-30 - Risk Management Guide for Information Technology Systems. 
(http://www hhs.gov/ocr/privacy/hipaa/administrative/securityrule/securityruleguidance html.)   
 
Guidance on Risk Analysis Requirements under the  
HIPAA Security Rule 
 
--- page 15 ---
   
Posted July 14, 2010 Page 2
protect against reasonably anticipated threats or hazards to the security or integrity of e-
PHI. Risk analysis is the first step in that process. 
 
We understand that the Security Rule does not prescribe a specific risk analysis 
methodology, recognizing that methods will vary dependent on the size, complexity, and 
capabilities of the organization. Instead, the Rule identifies risk analysis as the 
foundational element in the process of achieving compliance, and it establishes several 
objectives that any methodology adopted must achieve.  
 
 
Risk Analysis Requirements under the Security Rule  
 
The Security Management Process standard in the Security Rule requires organizations to 
“[i]mplement policies and procedures to prevent, detect, contain, and correct security 
violations.” (45 C.F.R. § 164.308(a)(1).) Risk analysis is one of four required 
implementation specifications that provide instructions to implement the Security 
Management Process standard.  Section 164.308(a)(1)(ii)(A) states:  
 
 
RISK ANALYSIS (Required).  
Conduct an accurate and thorough assessment of the potential risks and 
vulnerabilities to the confidentiality, integrity, and availability of electronic 
protected health information held by the [organization].  
 
 
The following questions adapted from NIST Special Publication (SP) 800-665 are examples 
organizations could consider as part of a risk analysis. These sample questions are not 
prescriptive and merely identify issues an organization may wish to consider in implementing 
the Security Rule:  
 
 Have you identified the e-PHI within your organization? This includes e-PHI that 
you create, receive, maintain or transmit.  
 What are the external sources of e-PHI? For example, do vendors or consultants 
create, receive, maintain or transmit e-PHI? 
 What are the human, natural, and environmental threats to information systems 
that contain e-PHI? 
 
In addition to an express requirement to conduct a risk analysis, the Rule indicates that 
risk analysis is a necessary tool in reaching substantial compliance with many other 
standards and implementation specifications. For example, the Rule contains several 
implementation specifications that are labeled “addressable” rather than “required.” (68 
FR 8334, 8336 (Feb. 20, 2003).) An addressable implementation specification is not 
optional; rather, if an organization determines that the implementation specification is not 
reasonable and appropriate, the organization must document why it is not reasonable and 
                                                 
5 See NIST SP 800-66, Section #4 "Considerations When Applying the HIPAA Security Rule." Available 
at http://www.hhs.gov/ocr/privacy/hipaa/administrative/securityrule/nist80066.pdf 
--- page 16 ---
   
Posted July 14, 2010 Page 3
appropriate and adopt an equivalent measure if it is reasonable and appropriate to do so. 
(See 68 FR 8334, 8336 (Feb. 20, 2003); 45 C.F.R. § 164.306(d)(3).)  
 
The outcome of the risk analysis process is a critical factor in assessing whether an 
implementation specification or an equivalent measure is reasonable and appropriate. 
Organizations should use the information gleaned from their risk analysis as they, for 
example: 
 
 Design appropriate personnel screening processes. (45 C.F.R. § 
164.308(a)(3)(ii)(B).) 
 Identify what data to backup and how. (45 C.F.R. § 164.308(a)(7)(ii)(A).) 
 Decide whether and how to use encryption. (45 C.F.R. §§ 164.312(a)(2)(iv) 
and (e)(2)(ii).) 
 Address what data must be authenticated in particular situations to protect 
data integrity. (45 C.F.R. § 164.312(c)(2).) 
 Determine the appropriate manner of protecting health information 
transmissions. (45 C.F.R. § 164.312(e)(1).) 
 
Important Definitions  
 
Unlike “availability”, “confidentiality” and “integrity”, the following terms are not 
expressly defined in the Security Rule. The definitions provided in this guidance, which 
are consistent with common industry definitions, are provided to put the risk analysis 
discussion in context. These terms do not modify or update the Security Rule and should 
not be interpreted inconsistently with the terms used in the Security Rule.  
 
Vulnerability
 
 
Vulnerability is defined in NIST Special Publication (SP) 800-30 as “[a] flaw or 
weakness in system security procedures, design, implementation, or internal controls that 
could be exercised (accidentally triggered or intentionally exploited) and result in a 
security breach or a violation of the system’s security policy.” 
 
Vulnerabilities, whether accidentally triggered or intentionally exploited, could 
potentially result in a security incident, such as inappropriate access to or disclosure of e-
PHI. Vulnerabilities may be grouped into two general categories, technical and non-
technical. Non-technical vulnerabilities may include ineffective or non-existent policies, 
procedures, standards or guidelines. Technical vulnerabilities may include: holes, flaws 
or weaknesses in the development of information systems; or incorrectly implemented 
and/or configured information systems.  
 
Threat
 
 
An adapted definition of threat, from NIST SP 800-30, is “[t]he potential for a person or 
thing to exercise (accidentally trigger or intentionally exploit) a specific vulnerability.”  
 
--- page 17 ---
   
Posted July 14, 2010 Page 4
There are several types of threats that may occur within an information system or 
operating environment. Threats may be grouped into general categories such as natural, 
human, and environmental. Examples of common threats in each of these general 
categories include:  
 
 Natural threats such as floods, earthquakes, tornadoes, and landslides.  
 
 Human threats are enabled or caused by humans and may include intentional 
(e.g., network and computer based attacks, malicious software upload, and 
unauthorized access to e-PHI) or unintentional (e.g., inadvertent data entry or 
deletion and inaccurate data entry) actions.  
 
 Environmental threats such as power failures, pollution, chemicals, and liquid 
leakage.  
 
Risk
 
 
An adapted definition of risk, from NIST SP 800-30, is:  
 
“The net mission impact considering (1) the probability that a particular [threat] will 
exercise (accidentally trigger or intentionally exploit) a particular [vulnerability] and (2) 
the resulting impact if this should occur . . . . [R]isks arise from legal liability or mission 
loss due to—  
1. Unauthorized (malicious or accidental) disclosure, modification, or 
destruction of information  
2. Unintentional errors and omissions  
3. IT disruptions due to natural or man- made disasters 
4. Failure to exercise due care and diligence in the implementation and 
operation of the IT system.”  
 
Risk can be understood as a function of 1) the likelihood of a given threat triggering or 
exploiting a particular vulnerability, and 2) the resulting impact on the organization. This 
means that risk is not a single factor or event, but rather it is a combination of factors or 
events (threats and vulnerabilities) that, if they occur, may have an adverse impact on the 
organization.  
 
Elements of a Risk Analysis 
 
There are numerous methods of performing risk analysis and there is no single method or 
“best practice” that guarantees compliance with the Security Rule. Some examples of 
steps that might be applied in a risk analysis process are outlined in NIST SP 800-30.
6  
 
The remainder of this guidance document explains several elements a risk analysis must 
incorporate, regardless of the method employed. 
                                                
 
6 Available at http://www.hhs.gov/ocr/privacy/hipaa/administrative/securityrule/nist800-30.pdf. 
--- page 18 ---
   
Posted July 14, 2010 Page 5
 
Scope of the Analysis 
 
The scope of risk analysis that the Security Rule encompasses includes the potential risks 
and vulnerabilities to the confidentiality, availability and integrity of all e-PHI that an 
organization creates, receives, maintains, or transmits. (45 C.F.R. § 164.306(a).) This 
includes e-PHI in all forms of electronic media, such as hard drives, floppy disks, CDs, 
DVDs, smart cards or other storage devices, personal digital assistants, transmission 
media, or portable electronic media. Electronic media includes a single workstation as 
well as complex networks connected between multiple locations. Thus, an organization’s 
risk analysis should take into account all of its e-PHI, regardless of the particular 
electronic medium in which it is created, received, maintained or transmitted or the 
source or location of its e-PHI.  
 
Data Collection
 
 
An organization must identify where the e-PHI is stored, received, maintained or 
transmitted. An organization could gather relevant data by: reviewing past and/or existing 
projects; performing interviews; reviewing documentation; or using other data gathering 
techniques. The data on e-PHI gathered using these methods must be documented. (See 
45 C.F.R. §§ 164.308(a)(1)(ii)(A) and 164.316(b)(1).)  
 
Identify and Document Potential Threats and Vulnerabilities
  
 
Organizations must identify and document reasonably anticipated threats to e-PHI. (See 
45 C.F.R. §§ 164.306(a)(2) and 164.316(b)(1)(ii).) Organizations may identify different 
threats that are unique to the circumstances of their environment. Organizations must also 
identify and document vulnerabilities which, if triggered or exploited by a threat, would 
create a risk of inappropriate access to or disclosure of e-PHI. (See 45 C.F.R. §§ 
164.308(a)(1)(ii)(A) and 164.316(b)(1)(ii).)  
 
Assess Current Security Measures 
 
 
Organizations should assess and document the security measures an entity uses to 
safeguard e-PHI, whether security measures required by the Security Rule are already in 
place, and if current security measures are configured and used properly. (See 45 C.F.R. 
§§ 164.306(b)(1), 164.308(a)(1)(ii)(A), and 164.316(b)(1).)  
 
The security measures implemented to reduce risk will vary among organizations. For 
example, small organizations tend to have more control within their environment. Small 
organizations tend to have fewer variables (i.e. fewer workforce members and 
information systems) to consider when making decisions regarding how to safeguard e-
PHI. As a result, the appropriate security measures that reduce the likelihood of risk to 
--- page 19 ---
   
Posted July 14, 2010 Page 6
the confidentiality, availability and integrity of e-PHI in a small organization may differ 
from those that are appropriate in large organizations.7  
 
Determine the Likelihood of Threat Occurrence  
 
The Security Rule requires organizations to take into account the probability of potential 
risks to e-PHI. (See 45 C.F.R. § 164.306(b)(2)(iv).) The results of this assessment, 
combined with the initial list of threats, will influence the determination of which threats 
the Rule requires protection against because they are “reasonably anticipated.”  
 
The output of this part should be documentation of all threat and vulnerability 
combinations with associated likelihood estimates that may impact the confidentiality, 
availability and integrity of e-PHI of an organization. (See 45 C.F.R. §§ 
164.306(b)(2)(iv), 164.308(a)(1)(ii)(A), and 164.316(b)(1)(ii).)  
 
Determine the Potential Impact of Threat Occurrence 
 
 
The Rule also requires consideration of the “criticality,” or impact, of potential risks to 
confidentiality, integrity, and availability of e-PHI. (See 45 C.F.R. § 164.306(b)(2)(iv).) 
An organization must assess the magnitude of the potential impact resulting from a threat 
triggering or exploiting a specific vulnerability. An entity may use either a qualitative or 
quantitative method or a combination of the two methods to measure the impact on the 
organization.  
 
The output of this process should be documentation of all potential impacts associated 
with the occurrence of threats triggering or exploiting vulnerabilities that affect the 
confidentiality, availability and integrity of e-PHI within an organization. (See 45 C.F.R. 
§§ 164.306(a)(2), 164.308(a)(1)(ii)(A), and 164.316(b)(1)(ii).)  
 
Determine the Level of Risk 
 
 
Organizations should assign risk levels for all threat and vulnerability combinations 
identified during the risk analysis. The level of risk could be determined, for example, by 
analyzing the values assigned to the likelihood of threat occurrence and resulting impact 
of threat occurrence. The risk level determination might be performed by assigning a risk 
level based on the average of the assigned likelihood and impact levels.  
 
The output should be documentation of the assigned risk levels and a list of corrective 
actions to be performed to mitigate each risk level. (See 45 C.F.R. §§ 164.306(a)(2), 
164.308(a)(1)(ii)(A), and 164.316(b)(1).)  
 
Finalize Documentation 
 
                                                 
7 For more information on methods smaller entities might employ to achieve compliance with the Security 
Rule, see #7 in the Center for Medicare and Medicaid Services’ (CMS) Security Series papers, titled 
“Implementation for the Small Provider.” Available at 
http://www hhs.gov/ocr/privacy/hipaa/administrative/securityrule/smallprovider.pdf. 
--- page 20 ---
   
Posted July 14, 2010 Page 7
 
The Security Rule requires the risk analysis to be documented but does not require a 
specific format. (See 45 C.F.R. § 164.316(b)(1).) The risk analysis documentation is a 
direct input to the risk management process. 
 
Periodic Review and Updates to the Risk Assessment
 
 
The risk analysis process should be ongoing. In order for an entity to update and 
document its security measures “as needed,” which the Rule requires, it should conduct 
continuous risk analysis to identify when updates are needed. (45 C.F.R. §§ 164.306(e) 
and 164.316(b)(2)(iii).) The Security Rule does not specify how frequently to perform 
risk analysis as part of a comprehensive risk management process. The frequency of 
performance will vary among covered entities. Some covered entities may perform these 
processes annually or as needed (e.g., bi-annual or every 3 years) depending on 
circumstances of their environment.  
 
A truly integrated risk analysis and management process is performed as new 
technologies and business operations are planned, thus reducing the effort required to 
address risks identified after implementation. For example, if the covered entity has 
experienced a security incident, has had change in ownership, turnover in key staff or 
management, is planning to incorporate new technology to make operations more 
efficient, the potential risk should be analyzed to ensure the e-PHI is reasonably and 
appropriately protected. If it is determined that existing security measures are not 
sufficient to protect against the risks associated with the evolving threats or 
vulnerabilities, a changing business environment, or the introduction of new technology, 
then the entity must determine if additional security measures are needed. Performing the 
risk analysis and adjusting risk management processes to address risks in a timely manner 
will allow the covered entity to reduce the associated risks to reasonable and appropriate 
levels.
8 
 
In Summary  
 
Risk analysis is the first step in an organization’s Security Rule compliance efforts. Risk 
analysis is an ongoing process that should provide the organization with a detailed 
understanding of the risks to the confidentiality, integrity, and availability of e-PHI.  
 
Resources  
 
The Security Series papers available on the Office for Civil Rights (OCR) website, 
http://www.hhs.gov/ocr/hipaa
, contain a more detailed discussion of tools and methods 
available for risk analysis and risk management, as well as other Security Rule 
                                                 
8  For more information on methods smaller entities might employ to achieve compliance with the Security 
Rule, see #6 in the Center for Medicare and Medicaid Services’ (CMS) Security Series papers, titled 
“Basics of Risk Analysis and Risk Management.” Available at 
http://www hhs.gov/ocr/privacy/hipaa/administrative/securityrule/riskassessment.pdf.  
 
--- page 21 ---
   
Posted July 14, 2010 Page 8
compliance requirements. Visit http://www.hhs.gov/ocr/hipaa for the latest guidance, 
FAQs and other information on the Security Rule. 
 
Several other federal and non-federal organizations have developed materials that might 
be helpful to covered entities seeking to develop and implement risk analysis and risk 
management strategies. The Department of Health and Human Services does not endorse 
or recommend any particular risk analysis or risk management model. The documents 
referenced below do not constitute legally binding guidance for covered entities, nor does 
adherence to any or all of the standards contained in these materials prove substantial 
compliance with the risk analysis requirements of the Security Rule. Rather, the materials 
are presented as examples of frameworks and methodologies that some organizations use 
to guide their risk analysis efforts. 
 
The National Institute of Standards and Technology (NIST), an agency of the United 
States Department of Commerce, is responsible for developing information security 
standards for federal agencies. NIST has produced a series of Special Publications, 
available at http://csrc.nist.gov/publications/PubsSPs.html
, which provide information 
that is relevant to information technology security. These papers include:  
 
 Guide to Technical Aspects of Performing Information Security Assessments (SP800-
115) 
 Information Security Handbook: A Guide for Managers (SP800-100; Chapter 10 
provides a Risk Management Framework and details steps in the risk management 
process) 
 An Introductory Resource Guide for Implementing the Health Insurance Portability 
and Accountability Act (HIPAA) Security Rule (SP800-66; Part 3 links the NIST Risk 
Management Framework to components of the Security Rule) 
 A draft publication, Managing Risk from Information Systems (SP800-39) 
 
The Office of the National Coordinator for Health Information Technology (ONC) has 
produced a risk assessment guide for small health care practices, called Reassessing Your 
Security Practices in a Health IT Environment, which is available at 
http://healthit.hhs.gov/portal/server.pt/gateway/PTARGS_0_10741_848086_0_0_18/Sma
llPracticeSecurityGuide-1.pdf.  
 
The Healthcare Information and Management Systems Society (HIMSS), a private 
consortium of health care information technology stakeholders, created an information 
technology security practices questionnaire, available at 
http://www.himss.org/content/files/ApplicationSecurityv2.3.pdf
. The questionnaire was 
developed to collect information about the state of IT security in the health care sector, 
but could also be a helpful self-assessment tool during the risk analysis process. 
 
The Health Information Trust Alliance (HITRUST) worked with industry to create the 
Common Security Framework (CSF), a proprietary resource available at 
http://hitrustcentral.net/files
. The risk management section of the document, Control 
Name: 03.0, explains the role of risk assessment and management in overall security 
--- page 22 ---
   
Posted July 14, 2010 Page 9
program development and implementation. The paper describes methods for 
implementing a risk analysis program, including knowledge and process requirements, 
and it links various existing frameworks and standards to applicable points in an 
information security life cycle. 