
40 CFR Part 262 - Standards Applicable to Generators of Hazardous Waste
=======================================================================


§ 262.11 Hazardous waste determination and recordkeeping.
---------------------------------------------------------

A person who generates a solid waste, as defined in 40 CFR 261.2, must make an accurate
determination as to whether that waste is a hazardous waste in order to ensure wastes are
properly managed according to applicable RCRA regulations. A hazardous waste determination
is made using the following steps:

(a) The hazardous waste determination for each solid waste must be made at the point of
waste generation, before any dilution, mixing, or other alteration of the waste occurs, and
at any time in the course of its management that it has, or may have, changed its properties
as a result of exposure to the environment or other factors that may change the properties
of the waste such that the RCRA classification of the waste may change.

(b) A person must determine whether the solid waste is excluded from regulation under 40 CFR
261.4.

(c) If the waste is not excluded under 40 CFR 261.4, the person must then use knowledge of
the waste to determine whether the waste meets any of the listing descriptions under subpart
D of 40 CFR part 261. Acceptable knowledge that may be used in making an accurate
determination as to whether the waste is listed may include waste origin, composition, the
process producing the waste, feedstock, and other reliable and relevant information. If the
waste is listed, the person may file a delisting petition under 40 CFR 260.20 and 260.22 to
demonstrate to the Administrator that the waste from this particular site or operation is
not a hazardous waste.

(d) The person then must also determine whether the waste exhibits one or more hazardous
characteristics as identified in subpart C of 40 CFR part 261 by following the procedures in
paragraph (d)(1) or (2) of this section, or a combination of both.

(1) The person must apply knowledge of the hazard characteristic of the waste in light of
the materials or the processes used to generate the waste. Acceptable knowledge may include
process knowledge (e.g., information about chemical feedstocks and other inputs to the
production process); knowledge of products, by-products, and intermediates produced by the
manufacturing process; chemical or physical characterization of wastes; information on the
chemical and physical properties of the chemicals used or produced by the process or
otherwise contained in the waste; testing that illustrates the properties of the waste; or
other reliable and relevant information about the properties of the waste or its
constituents. A test other than a test method set forth in subpart C of 40 CFR part 261, or
an equivalent test method approved by the Administrator under 40 CFR 260.21, may be used as
part of a person's knowledge to determine whether a solid waste exhibits a characteristic of
hazardous waste. However, such tests do not, by themselves, provide definitive results.
Persons testing their waste must obtain a representative sample of the waste for the
testing, as defined at 40 CFR 260.10.

(2) When available knowledge is inadequate to make an accurate determination, the person
must test the waste according to the applicable methods set forth in subpart C of 40 CFR
part 261 or according to an equivalent method approved by the Administrator under 40 CFR
260.21 and in accordance with the following:

(i) Persons testing their waste must obtain a representative sample of the waste for the
testing, as defined at 40 CFR 260.10.

(ii) Where a test method is specified in subpart C of 40 CFR part 261, the results of the
regulatory test, when properly performed, are definitive for determining the regulatory
status of the waste.

(e) If the waste is determined to be hazardous, the generator must refer to parts 261, 264,
265, 266, 267, 268, and 273 of this chapter for other possible exclusions or restrictions
pertaining to management of the specific waste.

(f) Recordkeeping for small and large quantity generators. A small or large quantity
generator must maintain records supporting its hazardous waste determinations, including
records that identify whether a solid waste is a hazardous waste, as defined by 40 CFR
261.3. Records must be maintained for at least three years from the date that the waste was
last sent to on-site or off-site treatment, storage, or disposal. These records must
comprise the generator's knowledge of the waste and support the generator's determination,
as described at paragraphs (c) and (d) of this section. The records must include, but are
not limited to, the following types of information: The results of any tests, sampling,
waste analyses, or other determinations made in accordance with this section; records
documenting the tests, sampling, and analytical methods used to demonstrate the validity and
relevance of such tests; records consulted in order to determine the process by which the
waste was generated, the composition of the waste, and the properties of the waste; and
records which explain the knowledge basis for the generator's determination, as described at
paragraph (d)(1) of this section. The periods of record retention referred to in this
section are extended automatically during the course of any unresolved enforcement action
regarding the regulated activity or as requested by the Administrator.

(g) Identifying hazardous waste numbers for small and large quantity generators. If the
waste is determined to be hazardous, small quantity generators and large quantity generators
must identify all applicable EPA hazardous waste numbers (EPA hazardous waste codes) in
subparts C and D of part 261 of this chapter. Prior to shipping the waste off site, the
generator also must mark its containers with all applicable EPA hazardous waste numbers (EPA
hazardous waste codes) according to § 262.32.


----------------------------------------------------------------------


§ 262.13 Generator category determination.
------------------------------------------

A generator must determine its generator category. A generator's category is based on the
amount of hazardous waste generated each month and may change from month to month. This
section sets forth procedures to determine whether a generator is a very small quantity
generator, a small quantity generator, or a large quantity generator for a particular month,
as defined in § 260.10 of this chapter.

(a) Generators of either acute hazardous waste or non-acute hazardous waste. A generator who
either generates acute hazardous waste or non-acute hazardous waste in a calendar month
shall determine its generator category for that month by doing the following:

(1) Counting the total amount of hazardous waste generated in the calendar month;

(2) Subtracting from the total any amounts of waste exempt from counting as described in
paragraphs (c) and (d) of this section; and

(3) Determining the resulting generator category for the hazardous waste generated using
Table 1 of this section.

(b) Generators of both acute and non-acute hazardous wastes. A generator who generates both
acute hazardous waste and non-acute hazardous waste in the same calendar month shall
determine its generator category for that month by doing the following:

(1) Counting separately the total amount of acute hazardous waste and the total amount of
non-acute hazardous waste generated in the calendar month;

(2) Subtracting from each total any amounts of waste exempt from counting as described in
paragraphs (c) and (d) of this section;

(3) Determining separately the resulting generator categories for the quantities of acute
and non-acute hazardous waste generated using Table 1 of this section; and

(4) Comparing the resulting generator categories from paragraph (b)(3) of this section and
applying the more stringent generator category to the accumulation and management of both
non-acute hazardous waste and acute hazardous waste generated for that month.


Table 1 to § 262.13—Generator Categories Based on Quantity of Waste Generated in a Calendar Month
-------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------

Quantity of    Quantity of non-acute hazardous       Quantity of     Generator category
acute          waste generated in a calendar month   residues from
hazardous                                            a cleanup of
waste                                                acute
generated in                                         hazardous
a calendar                                           waste
month                                                generated in a
                                                     calendar month

> 1 kg         Any amount                            Any amount      Large quantity generator.
Any amount     ≥ 1,000 kg                            Any amount      Large quantity generator.
Any amount     Any amount                            > 100 kg        Large quantity generator.
≤ 1 kg         > 100 kg and < 1,000 kg               ≤ 100 kg        Small quantity generator.
≤ 1 kg         ≤ 100 kg                              ≤ 100 kg        Very small quantity generator.

(c) When making the monthly quantity-based determinations required by this part, the
generator must include all hazardous waste that it generates, except hazardous waste that:

(1) Is exempt from regulation under 40 CFR 261.4(c) through (f), 261.6(a)(3), 261.7(a)(1),
or 261.8;

(2) Is managed immediately upon generation only in on-site elementary neutralization units,
wastewater treatment units, or totally enclosed treatment facilities as defined in 40 CFR
260.10;

(3) Is recycled, without prior storage or accumulation, only in an on-site process subject
to regulation under 40 CFR 261.6(c)(2);

(4) Is used oil managed under the requirements of 40 CFR 261.6(a)(4) and 40 CFR part 279;

(5) Is spent lead-acid batteries managed under the requirements of 40 CFR part 266 subpart
G;

(6) Is universal waste managed under 40 CFR 261.9 and 40 CFR part 273;

(7) Is a hazardous waste that is an unused commercial chemical product (listed in 40 CFR
part 261 subpart D or exhibiting one or more characteristics in 40 CFR part 261 subpart C)
that is generated solely as a result of a laboratory clean-out conducted at an eligible
academic entity pursuant to § 262.213. For purposes of this provision, the term eligible
academic entity shall have the meaning as defined in § 262.200; or

(8) Is managed as part of an episodic event in compliance with the conditions of subpart L
of this part.

(9) Is a hazardous waste pharmaceutical, as defined in § 266.500, that is subject to or
managed in accordance with 40 CFR part 266 subpart P or is a hazardous waste pharmaceutical
that is also a Drug Enforcement Administration controlled substance and is conditionally
exempt under § 266.506.

(d) In determining the quantity of hazardous waste generated in a calendar month, a
generator need not include:

(1) Hazardous waste when it is removed from on-site accumulation, so long as the hazardous
waste was previously counted once;

(2) Hazardous waste generated by on-site treatment (including reclamation) of the
generator's hazardous waste, so long as the hazardous waste that is treated was previously
counted once; and

(3) Hazardous waste spent materials that are generated, reclaimed, and subsequently reused
on site, so long as such spent materials have been previously counted once.

(e) Based on the generator category as determined under this section, the generator must
meet the applicable independent requirements listed in § 262.10. A generator's category also
determines which of the provisions of §§ 262.14, 262.15, 262.16 or 262.17 must be met to
obtain an exemption from the storage facility permit, interim status, and operating
requirements when accumulating hazardous waste.

(f) Mixing hazardous wastes with solid wastes—(1) Very small quantity generator wastes. (i)
Hazardous wastes generated by a very small quantity generator may be mixed with solid
wastes. Very small quantity generators may mix a portion or all of its hazardous waste with
solid waste and remain subject to § 262.14 even though the resultant mixture exceeds the
quantity limits identified in the definition of very small quantity generator at § 260.10 of
this chapter, unless the mixture exhibits one or more of the characteristics of hazardous
waste identified in part 261 subpart C of this chapter.

(ii) If the resulting mixture exhibits a characteristic of hazardous waste, this resultant
mixture is a newly-generated hazardous waste. The very small quantity generator must count
both the resultant mixture amount plus the other hazardous waste generated in the calendar
month to determine whether the total quantity exceeds the very small quantity generator
calendar month quantity limits identified in the definition of generator categories found in
§ 260.10 of this chapter. If so, to remain exempt from the permitting, interim status, and
operating standards, the very small quantity generator must meet the conditions for
exemption applicable to either a small quantity generator or a large quantity generator. The
very small quantity generator must also comply with the applicable independent requirements
for either a small quantity generator or a large quantity generator.

(iii) If a very small quantity generator's wastes are mixed with used oil, the mixture is
subject to 40 CFR part 279. Any material produced from such a mixture by processing,
blending, or other treatment is also regulated under 40 CFR part 279.

(2) Small quantity generator and large quantity generator wastes. (i) Hazardous wastes
generated by a small quantity generator or large quantity generator may be mixed with solid
waste. These mixtures are subject to the following: the mixture rule in §§ 261.3(a)(2)(iv),
(b)(2) and (3), and (g)(2)(i); the prohibition of dilution rule at § 268.3(a); the land
disposal restriction requirements of § 268.40 if a characteristic hazardous waste is mixed
with a solid waste so that it no longer exhibits the hazardous characteristic; and the
hazardous waste determination requirement at § 262.11.

(ii) If the resulting mixture is found to be a hazardous waste, this resultant mixture is a
newly-generated hazardous waste. A small quantity generator must count both the resultant
mixture amount plus the other hazardous waste generated in the calendar month to determine
whether the total quantity exceeds the small quantity generator calendar monthly quantity
limits identified in the definition of generator categories found in § 260.10 of this
chapter. If so, to remain exempt from the permitting, interim status, and operating
standards, the small quantity generator must meet the conditions for exemption applicable to
a large quantity generator. The small quantity generator must also comply with the
applicable independent requirements for a large quantity generator.


----------------------------------------------------------------------


§ 262.16 Conditions for exemption for a small quantity generator that accumulates hazardous waste.
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------

A small quantity generator may accumulate hazardous waste on site without a permit or
interim status, and without complying with the requirements of parts 124, 264 through 267,
and 270 of this chapter, or the notification requirements of section 3010 of RCRA for
treatment, storage, and disposal facilities, provided that all the conditions for exemption
listed in this section are met:

(a) Generation. The generator generates in a calendar month no more than the amounts
specified in the definition of “small quantity generator” in § 260.10 of this chapter.

(b) Accumulation. The generator accumulates hazardous waste on site for no more than 180
days, unless in compliance with the conditions for exemption for longer accumulation in
paragraphs (c), (d), and (e) of this section. The following accumulation conditions also
apply:

(1) Accumulation limit. The quantity of acute hazardous waste accumulated on site never
exceeds 1 kilogram (2.2 pounds) and the quantity of non-acute hazardous waste accumulated on
site never exceeds 6,000 kilograms (13,200 pounds);

(2) Accumulation of hazardous waste in containers—(i) Condition of containers. If a
container holding hazardous waste is not in good condition, or if it begins to leak, the
small quantity generator must immediately transfer the hazardous waste from this container
to a container that is in good condition, or immediately manage the waste in some other way
that complies with the conditions for exemption of this section.

(ii) Compatibility of waste with container. The small quantity generator must use a
container made of or lined with materials that will not react with, and are otherwise
compatible with, the hazardous waste to be accumulated, so that the ability of the container
to contain the waste is not impaired.

(iii) Management of containers. (A) A container holding hazardous waste must always be
closed during accumulation, except when it is necessary to add or remove waste.

(B) A container holding hazardous waste must not be opened, handled, or accumulated in a
manner that may rupture the container or cause it to leak.

(iv) Inspections. At least weekly, the small quantity generator must inspect central
accumulation areas. The small quantity generator must look for leaking containers and for
deterioration of containers caused by corrosion or other factors. See paragraph (b)(2)(i) of
this section for remedial action required if deterioration or leaks are detected.

(v) Special conditions for accumulation of incompatible wastes. (A) Incompatible wastes, or
incompatible wastes and materials, (see appendix V of part 265 for examples) must not be
placed in the same container, unless § 265.17(b) of this chapter is complied with.

(B) Hazardous waste must not be placed in an unwashed container that previously held an
incompatible waste or material (see appendix V of part 265 for examples), unless § 265.17(b)
of this chapter is complied with.

(C) A container accumulating hazardous waste that is incompatible with any waste or other
materials accumulated or stored nearby in other containers, piles, open tanks, or surface
impoundments must be separated from the other materials or protected from them by means of a
dike, berm, wall, or other device.

(3) Accumulation of hazardous waste in tanks.

(i) [Reserved]

(ii) A small quantity generator of hazardous waste must comply with the following general
operating conditions:

(A) Treatment or accumulation of hazardous waste in tanks must comply with § 265.17(b) of
this chapter.

(B) Hazardous wastes or treatment reagents must not be placed in a tank if they could cause
the tank or its inner liner to rupture, leak, corrode, or otherwise fail before the end of
its intended life.

(C) Uncovered tanks must be operated to ensure at least 60 centimeters (2 feet) of
freeboard, unless the tank is equipped with a containment structure (e.g., dike or trench),
a drainage control system, or a diversion structure (e.g., standby tank) with a capacity
that equals or exceeds the volume of the top 60 centimeters (2 feet) of the tank.

(D) Where hazardous waste is continuously fed into a tank, the tank must be equipped with a
means to stop this inflow (e.g., waste feed cutoff system or by-pass system to a stand-by
tank).

(iii) Except as noted in paragraph (b)(3)(iv) of this section, a small quantity generator
that accumulates hazardous waste in tanks must inspect, where present:

(A) Discharge control equipment (e.g., waste feed cutoff systems, by-pass systems, and
drainage systems) at least once each operating day, to ensure that it is in good working
order;

(B) Data gathered from monitoring equipment (e.g., pressure and temperature gauges) at least
once each operating day to ensure that the tank is being operated according to its design;

(C) The level of waste in the tank at least once each operating day to ensure compliance
with paragraph (b)(3)(ii)(C) of this section;

(D) The construction materials of the tank at least weekly to detect corrosion or leaking of
fixtures or seams; and

(E) The construction materials of, and the area immediately surrounding, discharge
confinement structures (e.g., dikes) at least weekly to detect erosion or obvious signs of
leakage (e.g., wet spots or dead vegetation). The generator must remedy any deterioration or
malfunction of equipment or structures which the inspection reveals on a schedule which
ensures that the problem does not lead to an environmental or human health hazard. Where a
hazard is imminent or has already occurred, remedial action must be taken immediately.

(iv) A small quantity generator accumulating hazardous waste in tanks or tank systems that
have full secondary containment and that either use leak detection equipment to alert
personnel to leaks, or implement established workplace practices to ensure leaks are
promptly identified, must inspect at least weekly, where applicable, the areas identified in
paragraphs (b)(3)(iii)(A) through (E) of this section. Use of the alternate inspection
schedule must be documented in the generator's operating record. This documentation must
include a description of the established workplace practices at the generator.

(v) [Reserved]

(vi) A small quantity generator accumulating hazardous waste in tanks must, upon closure of
the facility, remove all hazardous waste from tanks, discharge control equipment, and
discharge confinement structures. At closure, as throughout the operating period, unless the
small quantity generator can demonstrate, in accordance with § 261.3(c) or (d) of this
chapter, that any solid waste removed from its tank is not a hazardous waste, then it must
manage such waste in accordance with all applicable provisions of parts 262, 263, 265 and
268 of this chapter.

(vii) A small quantity generator must comply with the following special conditions for
accumulation of ignitable or reactive waste:

(A) Ignitable or reactive waste must not be placed in a tank, unless:

(1) The waste is treated, rendered, or mixed before or immediately after placement in a tank
so that the resulting waste, mixture, or dissolution of material no longer meets the
definition of ignitable or reactive waste under § 261.21 or § 261.23 of this chapter and §
265.17(b) of this chapter is complied with; or

(2) The waste is accumulated or treated in such a way that it is protected from any material
or conditions that may cause the waste to ignite or react; or

(3) The tank is used solely for emergencies.

(B) A small quantity generator which treats or accumulates ignitable or reactive waste in
covered tanks must comply with the buffer zone requirements for tanks contained in Tables
2-1 through 2-6 of the National Fire Protection Association's “Flammable and Combustible
Liquids Code” (1977 or 1981) (incorporated by reference, see § 260.11).

(C) A small quantity generator must comply with the following special conditions for
incompatible wastes:

(1) Incompatible wastes, or incompatible wastes and materials, (see part 265 appendix V for
examples) must not be placed in the same tank, unless § 265.17(b) of this chapter is
complied with.

(2) Hazardous waste must not be placed in an unwashed tank that previously held an
incompatible waste or material, unless § 265.17(b) of this chapter is complied with.

(4) Accumulation of hazardous waste on drip pads. If the waste is placed on drip pads, the
small quantity generator must comply with the following:

(i) Subpart W of 40 CFR part 265 (except § 265.445 (c));

(ii) The small quantity generator must remove all wastes from the drip pad at least once
every 90 days. Any hazardous wastes that are removed from the drip pad at least once every
90 days are then subject to the 180-day accumulation limit in paragraph (b) of this section
and § 262.15 if hazardous wastes are being managed in satellite accumulation areas prior to
being moved to the central accumulation area; and

(iii) The small quantity generator must maintain on site at the facility the following
records readily available for inspection:

(A) A written description of procedures that are followed to ensure that all wastes are
removed from the drip pad and associated collection system at least once every 90 days; and

(B) Documentation of each waste removal, including the quantity of waste removed from the
drip pad and the sump or collection system and the date and time of removal.

(5) Accumulation of hazardous waste in containment buildings. If the waste is placed in
containment buildings, the small quantity generator must comply with 40 CFR part 265 subpart
DD. The generator must label its containment buildings with the words “Hazardous Waste” in a
conspicuous place easily visible to employees, visitors, emergency responders, waste
handlers, or other persons on site and also in a conspicuous place provide an indication of
the hazards of the contents (examples include, but are not limited to, the applicable
hazardous waste characteristic(s) (i.e., ignitable, corrosive, reactive, toxic); hazard
communication consistent with the Department of Transportation requirements at 49 CFR part
172, subpart E (labeling) or subpart F (placarding); a hazard statement or pictogram
consistent with the Occupational Safety and Health Administration Hazard Communication
Standard at 29 CFR 1910.1200; or a chemical hazard label consistent with the National Fire
Protection Association code 704). The generator must also maintain:

(i) The professional engineer certification that the building complies with the design
standards specified in 40 CFR 265.1101. This certification must be in the generator's files
prior to operation of the unit; and

(ii) The following records by use of inventory logs, monitoring equipment, or any other
effective means:

(A) A written description of procedures to ensure that each waste volume remains in the unit
for no more than 90 days, a written description of the waste generation and management
practices for the facility showing that the generator is consistent with maintaining the 90
day limit, and documentation that the procedures are complied with; or

(B) Documentation that the unit is emptied at least once every 90 days.

(C) Inventory logs or records with the above information must be maintained on site and
readily available for inspection.

(6) Labeling and marking of containers and tanks—. (i) Containers. A small quantity
generator must mark or label its containers with the following:

(A) The words “Hazardous Waste”;

(B) An indication of the hazards of the contents (examples include, but are not limited to,
the applicable hazardous waste characteristic(s) (i.e., ignitable, corrosive, reactive,
toxic); hazard communication consistent with the Department of Transportation requirements
at 49 CFR part 172 subpart E (labeling) or subpart F (placarding); a hazard statement or
pictogram consistent with the Occupational Safety and Health Administration Hazard
Communication Standard at 29 CFR 1910.1200; or a chemical hazard label consistent with the
National Fire Protection Association code 704); and

(C) The date upon which each period of accumulation begins clearly visible for inspection on
each container.

(ii) Tanks. A small quantity generator accumulating hazardous waste in tanks must do the
following:

(A) Mark or label its tanks with the words “Hazardous Waste”;

(B) Mark or label its tanks with an indication of the hazards of the contents (examples
include, but are not limited to, the applicable hazardous waste characteristic(s) (i.e.,
ignitable, corrosive, reactive, toxic); hazard communication consistent with the Department
of Transportation requirements at 49 CFR part 172 subpart E (labeling) or subpart F
(placarding); a hazard statement or pictogram consistent with the Occupational Safety and
Health Administration Hazard Communication Standard at 29 CFR 1910.1200; or a chemical
hazard label consistent with the National Fire Protection Association code 704);

(C) Use inventory logs, monitoring equipment, or other records to demonstrate that hazardous
waste has been emptied within 180 days of first entering the tank if using a batch process,
or in the case of a tank with a continuous flow process, demonstrate that estimated volumes
of hazardous waste entering the tank daily exit the tank within 180 days of first entering;
and

(D) Keep inventory logs or records with the above information on site and readily available
for inspection.

(7) Land disposal restrictions. A small quantity generator must comply with all the
applicable requirements under 40 CFR part 268.

(8) Preparedness and prevention—(i) Maintenance and operation of facility. A small quantity
generator must maintain and operate its facility to minimize the possibility of a fire,
explosion, or any unplanned sudden or non-sudden release of hazardous waste or hazardous
waste constituents to air, soil, or surface water which could threaten human health or the
environment.

(ii) Required equipment. All areas where hazardous waste is either generated or accumulated
must be equipped with the items in paragraphs (b)(8)(ii)(A) through (D) of this section
(unless none of the hazards posed by waste handled at the facility could require a
particular kind of equipment specified below or the actual waste generation or accumulation
area does not lend itself for safety reasons to have a particular kind of equipment
specified below). A small quantity generator may determine the most appropriate locations to
locate equipment necessary to prepare for and respond to emergencies.

(A) An internal communications or alarm system capable of providing immediate emergency
instruction (voice or signal) to facility personnel;

(B) A device, such as a telephone (immediately available at the scene of operations) or a
hand-held two-way radio, capable of summoning emergency assistance from local police
departments, fire departments, or State or local emergency response teams;

(C) Portable fire extinguishers, fire control equipment (including special extinguishing
equipment, such as that using foam, inert gas, or dry chemicals), spill control equipment,
and decontamination equipment; and

(D) Water at adequate volume and pressure to supply water hose streams, or foam producing
equipment, or automatic sprinklers, or water spray systems.

(iii) Testing and maintenance of equipment. All communications or alarm systems, fire
protection equipment, spill control equipment, and decontamination equipment, where
required, must be tested and maintained as necessary to assure its proper operation in time
of emergency.

(iv) Access to communications or alarm system. (A) Whenever hazardous waste is being poured,
mixed, spread, or otherwise handled, all personnel involved in the operation must have
immediate access (e.g., direct or unimpeded access) to an internal alarm or emergency
communication device, either directly or through visual or voice contact with another
employee, unless such a device is not required under paragraph (b)(8)(ii) of this section.

(B) In the event there is just one employee on the premises while the facility is operating,
the employee must have immediate access (e.g., direct or unimpeded access) to a device, such
as a telephone (immediately available at the scene of operation) or a hand-held two-way
radio, capable of summoning external emergency assistance, unless such a device is not
required under paragraph (b)(8)(ii) of this section.

(v) Required aisle space. The small quantity generator must maintain aisle space to allow
the unobstructed movement of personnel, fire protection equipment, spill control equipment,
and decontamination equipment to any area of facility operation in an emergency, unless
aisle space is not needed for any of these purposes.

(vi) Arrangements with local authorities. (A) The small quantity generator must attempt to
make arrangements with the local police department, fire department, other emergency
response teams, emergency response contractors, equipment suppliers and local hospitals,
taking into account the types and quantities of hazardous wastes handled at the facility.
Arrangements may be made with the Local Emergency Planning Committee, if it is determined to
be the appropriate organization with which to make arrangements.

(1) A small quantity generator attempting to make arrangements with its local fire
department must determine the potential need for the services of the local police
department, other emergency response teams, emergency response contractors, equipment
suppliers and local hospitals.

(2) As part of this coordination, the small quantity generator shall attempt to make
arrangements, as necessary, to familiarize the above organizations with the layout of the
facility, the properties of hazardous waste handled at the facility and associated hazards,
places where facility personnel would normally be working, entrances to roads inside the
facility, and possible evacuation routes as well as the types of injuries or illnesses that
could result from fires, explosions, or releases at the facility.

(3) Where more than one police or fire department might respond to an emergency, the small
quantity generator shall attempt to make arrangements designating primary emergency
authority to a specific fire or police department, and arrangements with any others to
provide support to the primary emergency authority.

(B) A small quantity generator shall maintain records documenting the arrangements with the
local fire department as well as any other organization necessary to respond to an
emergency. This documentation must include documentation in the operating record that either
confirms such arrangements actively exist or, in cases where no arrangements exist, confirms
that attempts to make such arrangements were made.

(C) A facility possessing 24-hour response capabilities may seek a waiver from the authority
having jurisdiction (AHJ) over the fire code within the facility's state or locality as far
as needing to make arrangements with the local fire department as well as any other
organization necessary to respond to an emergency, provided that the waiver is documented in
the operating record.

(9) Emergency procedures. The small quantity generator complies with the following
conditions for those areas of the generator facility where hazardous waste is generated and
accumulated:

(i) At all times there must be at least one employee either on the premises or on call
(i.e., available to respond to an emergency by reaching the facility within a short period
of time) with the responsibility for coordinating all emergency response measures specified
in paragraph (b)(9)(iv) of this section. This employee is the emergency coordinator.

(ii) The small quantity generator must post the following information next to telephones or
in areas directly involved in the generation and accumulation of hazardous waste:

(A) The name and emergency telephone number of the emergency coordinator;

(B) Location of fire extinguishers and spill control material, and, if present, fire alarm;
and

(C) The telephone number of the fire department, unless the facility has a direct alarm.

(iii) The small quantity generator must ensure that all employees are thoroughly familiar
with proper waste handling and emergency procedures, relevant to their responsibilities
during normal facility operations and emergencies;

(iv) The emergency coordinator or his designee must respond to any emergencies that arise.
The applicable responses are as follows:

(A) In the event of a fire, call the fire department or attempt to extinguish it using a
fire extinguisher;

(B) In the event of a spill, the small quantity generator is responsible for containing the
flow of hazardous waste to the extent possible, and as soon as is practicable, cleaning up
the hazardous waste and any contaminated materials or soil. Such containment and cleanup can
be conducted either by the small quantity generator or by a contractor on behalf of the
small quantity generator;

(C) In the event of a fire, explosion, or other release that could threaten human health
outside the facility or when the small quantity generator has knowledge that a spill has
reached surface water, the small quantity generator must immediately notify the National
Response Center (using their 24-hour toll free number 800/424-8802). The report must include
the following information:

(1) The name, address, and U.S. EPA identification number of the small quantity generator;

(2) Date, time, and type of incident (e.g., spill or fire);

(3) Quantity and type of hazardous waste involved in the incident;

(4) Extent of injuries, if any; and

(5) Estimated quantity and disposition of recovered materials, if any.

(c) Transporting over 200 miles. A small quantity generator who must transport its waste, or
offer its waste for transportation, over a distance of 200 miles or more for off-site
treatment, storage or disposal may accumulate hazardous waste on site for 270 days or less
without a permit or without having interim status provided that the generator complies with
the conditions of paragraph (b) of this section.

(d) Accumulation time limit extension. A small quantity generator who accumulates hazardous
waste for more than 180 days (or for more than 270 days if it must transport its waste, or
offer its waste for transportation, over a distance of 200 miles or more) is subject to the
requirements of 40 CFR parts 264, 265, 267, 268, and 270 of this chapter unless it has been
granted an extension to the 180-day (or 270-day if applicable) period. Such extension may be
granted by EPA if hazardous wastes must remain on site for longer than 180 days (or 270 days
if applicable) due to unforeseen, temporary, and uncontrollable circumstances. An extension
of up to 30 days may be granted at the discretion of the Regional Administrator on a case-
by-case basis.

(e) Rejected load. A small quantity generator who sends a shipment of hazardous waste to a
designated facility with the understanding that the designated facility can accept and
manage the waste and later receives that shipment back as a rejected load or residue in
accordance with the manifest discrepancy provisions of § 264.72 or § 265.72 of this chapter
may accumulate the returned waste on site in accordance with paragraphs (a)-(d) of this
section. Upon receipt of the returned shipment, the generator must:

(1) Sign Item 18c of the manifest, if the transporter returned the shipment using the
original manifest; or

(2) Sign Item 20 of the manifest, if the transporter returned the shipment using a new
manifest.

(f) A small quantity generator experiencing an episodic event may accumulate hazardous waste
in accordance with subpart L of this part in lieu of § 262.17.


----------------------------------------------------------------------


§ 262.17 Conditions for exemption for a large quantity generator that accumulates hazardous waste.
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------

A large quantity generator may accumulate hazardous waste on site without a permit or
interim status, and without complying with the requirements of parts 124, 264 through 267,
and 270 of this chapter, or the notification requirements of section 3010 of RCRA for
treatment, storage, and disposal facilities, provided that all of the following conditions
for exemption are met:

(a) Accumulation. A large quantity generator accumulates hazardous waste on site for no more
than 90 days, unless in compliance with the accumulation time limit extension or F006
accumulation conditions for exemption in paragraphs (b) through (e) of this section. The
following accumulation conditions also apply:

(1) Accumulation of hazardous waste in containers. If the hazardous waste is placed in
containers, the large quantity generator must comply with the following:

(i) Air emission standards. The applicable requirements of subparts AA, BB, and CC of 40 CFR
part 265;

(ii) Condition of containers. If a container holding hazardous waste is not in good
condition, or if it begins to leak, the large quantity generator must immediately transfer
the hazardous waste from this container to a container that is in good condition, or
immediately manage the waste in some other way that complies with the conditions for
exemption of this section;

(iii) Compatibility of waste with container. The large quantity generator must use a
container made of or lined with materials that will not react with, and are otherwise
compatible with, the hazardous waste to be stored, so that the ability of the container to
contain the waste is not impaired;

(iv) Management of containers. (A) A container holding hazardous waste must always be closed
during accumulation, except when it is necessary to add or remove waste.

(B) A container holding hazardous waste must not be opened, handled, or stored in a manner
that may rupture the container or cause it to leak.

(v) Inspections. At least weekly, the large quantity generator must inspect central
accumulation areas. The large quantity generator must look for leaking containers and for
deterioration of containers caused by corrosion or other factors. See paragraph (a)(1)(ii)
of this section for remedial action required if deterioration or leaks are detected.

(vi) Special conditions for accumulation of ignitable and reactive wastes. (A) Containers
holding ignitable or reactive waste must be located at least 15 meters (50 feet) from the
facility's property line unless a written approval is obtained from the authority having
jurisdiction over the local fire code allowing hazardous waste accumulation to occur within
this restricted area. A record of the written approval must be maintained as long as
ignitable or reactive hazardous waste is accumulated in this area.

(B) The large quantity generator must take precautions to prevent accidental ignition or
reaction of ignitable or reactive waste. This waste must be separated and protected from
sources of ignition or reaction including but not limited to the following: Open flames,
smoking, cutting and welding, hot surfaces, frictional heat, sparks (static, electrical, or
mechanical), spontaneous ignition (e.g., from heat-producing chemical reactions), and
radiant heat. While ignitable or reactive waste is being handled, the large quantity
generator must confine smoking and open flame to specially designated locations. “No
Smoking” signs must be conspicuously placed wherever there is a hazard from ignitable or
reactive waste.

(vii) Special conditions for accumulation of incompatible wastes. (A) Incompatible wastes,
or incompatible wastes and materials, (see appendix V of part 265 for examples) must not be
placed in the same container, unless § 265.17(b) of this chapter is complied with.

(B) Hazardous waste must not be placed in an unwashed container that previously held an
incompatible waste or material (see appendix V of part 265 for examples), unless § 265.17(b)
of this chapter is complied with.

(C) A container holding a hazardous waste that is incompatible with any waste or other
materials accumulated or stored nearby in other containers, piles, open tanks, or surface
impoundments must be separated from the other materials or protected from them by means of a
dike, berm, wall, or other device.

(2) Accumulation of hazardous waste in tanks. If the waste is placed in tanks, the large
quantity generator must comply with the applicable requirements of subpart J (except §§
265.197(c) and 265.200 of this subchapter) as well as the applicable requirements of 40 CFR
part 265, subparts AA through CC.

(3) Accumulation of hazardous waste on drip pads. If the hazardous waste is placed on drip
pads, the large quantity generator must comply with the following:

(i) Subpart W of 40 CFR part 265;

(ii) The large quantity generator must remove all wastes from the drip pad at least once
every 90 days. Any hazardous wastes that are removed from the drip pad are then subject to
the 90-day accumulation limit in paragraph (a) of this section and § 262.15, if the
hazardous wastes are being managed in satellite accumulation areas prior to being moved to a
central accumulation area; and

(iii) The large quantity generator must maintain on site at the facility the following
records readily available for inspection:

(A) A written description of procedures that are followed to ensure that all wastes are
removed from the drip pad and associated collection system at least once every 90 days; and

(B) Documentation of each waste removal, including the quantity of waste removed from the
drip pad and the sump or collection system and the date and time of removal.

(4) Accumulation of hazardous waste in containment buildings. If the waste is placed in
containment buildings, the large quantity generator must comply with of 40 CFR part 265
subpart DD. The generator must label its containment building with the words “Hazardous
Waste” in a conspicuous place easily visible to employees, visitors, emergency responders,
waste handlers, or other persons on site, and also in a conspicuous place provide an
indication of the hazards of the contents (examples include, but are not limited to, the
applicable hazardous waste characteristic(s) (i.e., ignitable, corrosive, reactive, toxic);
hazard communication consistent with the Department of Transportation requirements at 49 CFR
part 172 subpart E (labeling) or subpart F (placarding); a hazard statement or pictogram
consistent with the Occupational Safety and Health Administration Hazard Communication
Standard at 29 CFR 1910.1200; or a chemical hazard label consistent with the National Fire
Protection Association code 704). The generator must also maintain:

(i) The professional engineer certification that the building complies with the design
standards specified in 40 CFR 265.1101. This certification must be in the generator's files
prior to operation of the unit; and

(ii) The following records by use of inventory logs, monitoring equipment, or any other
effective means:

(A) A written description of procedures to ensure that each waste volume remains in the unit
for no more than 90 days, a written description of the waste generation and management
practices for the facility showing that the generator is consistent with respecting the 90
day limit, and documentation that the procedures are complied with; or

(B) Documentation that the unit is emptied at least once every 90 days.

(C) Inventory logs or records with the above information must be maintained on site and
readily available for inspection.

(5) Labeling and marking of containers and tanks—(i) Containers. A large quantity generator
must mark or label its containers with the following:

(A) The words “Hazardous Waste”;

(B) An indication of the hazards of the contents (examples include, but are not limited to,
the applicable hazardous waste characteristic(s) (i.e., ignitable, corrosive, reactive,
toxic); hazard communication consistent with the Department of Transportation requirements
at 49 CFR part 172 subpart E (labeling) or subpart F (placarding); a hazard statement or
pictogram consistent with the Occupational Safety and Health Administration Hazard
Communication Standard at 29 CFR 1910.1200; or a chemical hazard label consistent with the
National Fire Protection Association code 704); and

(C) The date upon which each period of accumulation begins clearly visible for inspection on
each container.

(ii) Tanks. A large quantity generator accumulating hazardous waste in tanks must do the
following:

(A) Mark or label its tanks with the words “Hazardous Waste”;

(B) Mark or label its tanks with an indication of the hazards of the contents (examples
include, but are not limited to, the applicable hazardous waste characteristic(s) (i.e.,
ignitable, corrosive, reactive, toxic); hazard communication consistent with the Department
of Transportation requirements at 49 CFR part 172 subpart E (labeling) or subpart F
(placarding); a hazard statement or pictogram consistent with the Occupational Safety and
Health Administration Hazard Communication Standard at 29 CFR 1910.1200; or a chemical
hazard label consistent with the National Fire Protection Association code 704);

(C) Use inventory logs, monitoring equipment or other records to demonstrate that hazardous
waste has been emptied within 90 days of first entering the tank if using a batch process,
or in the case of a tank with a continuous flow process, demonstrate that estimated volumes
of hazardous waste entering the tank daily exit the tank within 90 days of first entering;
and

(D) Keep inventory logs or records with the above information on site and readily available
for inspection.

(6) Emergency procedures. The large quantity generator complies with the standards in
subpart M of this part, Preparedness, Prevention and Emergency Procedures for Large Quantity
Generators.

(7) Personnel training. (i)(A) Facility personnel must successfully complete a program of
classroom instruction, online training (e.g., computer-based or electronic), or on-the-job
training that teaches them to perform their duties in a way that ensures compliance with
this part. The large quantity generator must ensure that this program includes all the
elements described in the document required under paragraph (a)(7)(iv)(C) of this section.

(B) This program must be directed by a person trained in hazardous waste management
procedures, and must include instruction which teaches facility personnel hazardous waste
management procedures (including contingency plan implementation) relevant to the positions
in which they are employed.

(C) At a minimum, the training program must be designed to ensure that facility personnel
are able to respond effectively to emergencies by familiarizing them with emergency
procedures, emergency equipment, and emergency systems, including where applicable:

(1) Procedures for using, inspecting, repairing, and replacing facility emergency and
monitoring equipment;

(2) Key parameters for automatic waste feed cut-off systems;

(3) Communications or alarm systems;

(4) Response to fires or explosions;

(5) Response to ground-water contamination incidents; and

(6) Shutdown of operations.

(D) For facility employees that receive emergency response training pursuant to Occupational
Safety and Health Administration regulations 29 CFR 1910.120(p)(8) and 1910.120(q), the
large quantity generator is not required to provide separate emergency response training
pursuant to this section, provided that the overall facility training meets all the
conditions of exemption in this section.

(ii) Facility personnel must successfully complete the program required in paragraph
(a)(7)(i) of this section within six months after the date of their employment or assignment
to the facility, or to a new position at the facility, whichever is later. Employees must
not work in unsupervised positions until they have completed the training standards of
paragraph (a)(7)(i) of this section.

(iii) Facility personnel must take part in an annual review of the initial training required
in paragraph (a)(7)(i) of this section.

(iv) The large quantity generator must maintain the following documents and records at the
facility:

(A) The job title for each position at the facility related to hazardous waste management,
and the name of the employee filling each job;

(B) A written job description for each position listed under paragraph (a)(7)(iv)(A) of this
section. This description may be consistent in its degree of specificity with descriptions
for other similar positions in the same company location or bargaining unit, but must
include the requisite skill, education, or other qualifications, and duties of facility
personnel assigned to each position;

(C) A written description of the type and amount of both introductory and continuing
training that will be given to each person filling a position listed under paragraph
(a)(7)(iv)(A) of this section;

(D) Records that document that the training or job experience, required under paragraphs
(a)(7)(i), (ii), and (iii) of this section, has been given to, and completed by, facility
personnel.

(v) Training records on current personnel must be kept until closure of the facility.
Training records on former employees must be kept for at least three years from the date the
employee last worked at the facility. Personnel training records may accompany personnel
transferred within the same company.

(8) Closure. A large quantity generator accumulating hazardous wastes in containers, tanks,
drip pads, and containment buildings, prior to closing a unit at the facility, or prior to
closing the facility, must meet the following conditions:

(i) Notification for closure of a waste accumulation unit. A large quantity generator must
perform one of the following when closing a waste accumulation unit, but not all waste
accumulation units:

(A) Place a notice in the operating record within 30 days after closure identifying the
location of the unit within the facility (if the waste accumulation unit is subsequently
reopened, the generator may remove the notice from the operating record); or

(B) Meet the closure performance standards of paragraph (a)(8)(iii) of this section for
container, tank, and containment building waste accumulation units or paragraph (a)(8)(iv)
of this section for drip pads and notify EPA following the procedures in paragraph
(a)(8)(ii)(B) of this section for the waste accumulation unit.

(ii) Notification for closure of the facility. (A) Notify EPA using form 8700-12 no later
than 30 days prior to closing the facility.

(B) Notify EPA using form 8700-12 within 90 days after closing the facility that it has
complied with the closure performance standards of paragraph (a)(8)(iii) or (iv) of this
section. If the facility cannot meet the closure performance standards of paragraph
(a)(8)(iii) or (iv) of this section, notify EPA using form 8700-12 that it will close as a
landfill under § 265.310 of this chapter in the case of a container, tank or containment
building unit(s), or for a facility with drip pads, notify using form 8700-12 that it will
close under the standards of § 265.445(b).

(C) A large quantity generator may request additional time to clean close, but it must
notify EPA using form 8700-12 within 75 days after the date provided in paragraph
(a)(8)(ii)(A) of this section to request an extension and provide an explanation as to why
the additional time is required.

(iii) Closure performance standards for container, tank systems, and containment building
waste accumulation units. (A) At closure, the generator must close the waste accumulation
unit or facility in a manner that:

(1) Minimizes the need for further maintenance by controlling, minimizing, or eliminating,
to the extent necessary to protect human health and the environment, the post-closure escape
of hazardous waste, hazardous constituents, leachate, contaminated run-off, or hazardous
waste decomposition products to the ground or surface waters or to the atmosphere,

(2) Removes or decontaminates all contaminated equipment, structures and soil and any
remaining hazardous waste residues from waste accumulation units including containment
system components (pads, liners, etc.), contaminated soils and subsoils, bases, and
structures and equipment contaminated with waste, unless § 261.3(d) of this chapter applies.

(3) Any hazardous waste generated in the process of closing either the generator's facility
or unit(s) accumulating hazardous waste must be managed in accordance with all applicable
standards of parts 262, 263, 265 and 268 of this chapter, including removing any hazardous
waste contained in these units within 90 days of generating it and managing these wastes in
a RCRA Subtitle C hazardous waste permitted treatment, storage and disposal facility or
interim status facility.

(4) If the generator demonstrates that any contaminated soils and wastes cannot be
practicably removed or decontaminated as required in paragraph (a)(8)(iii)(A)(2) of this
section, then the waste accumulation unit is considered to be a landfill and the generator
must close the waste accumulation unit and perform postclosure care in accordance with the
closure and post-closure care requirements that apply to landfills (§ 265.310 of this
subchapter). In addition, for the purposes of closure, post-closure, and financial
responsibility, such a waste accumulation unit is then considered to be a landfill, and the
generator must meet all of the requirements for landfills specified in 40 CFR part 265,
subparts G and H.

(iv) Closure performance standards for drip pad waste accumulation units. At closure, the
generator must comply with the closure requirements of paragraphs (a)(8)(ii) and
(a)(8)(iii)(A)(1) and (3) of this section, and § 265.445(a) and (b) of this chapter.

(v) The closure requirements of paragraph (a)(8) of this section do not apply to satellite
accumulation areas.

(9) Land disposal restrictions. The large quantity generator complies with all applicable
requirements under 40 CFR part 268.

(b) Accumulation time limit extension. A large quantity generator who accumulates hazardous
waste for more than 90 days is subject to the requirements of 40 CFR parts 124, 264 through
268, and part 270 of this chapter, and the notification requirements of section 3010 of RCRA
for treatment, storage, and disposal facilities, unless it has been granted an extension to
the 90-day period. Such extension may be granted by EPA if hazardous wastes must remain on
site for longer than 90 days due to unforeseen, temporary, and uncontrollable circumstances.
An extension of up to 30 days may be granted at the discretion of the Regional Administrator
on a case-by-case basis.

(c) Accumulation of F006. A large quantity generator who also generates wastewater treatment
sludges from electroplating operations that meet the listing description for the EPA
hazardous waste number F006, may accumulate F006 waste on site for more than 90 days, but
not more than 180 days without being subject to parts 124, 264 through 267, and 270 of this
chapter, and the notification requirements of section 3010 of RCRA for treatment, storage,
and disposal facilities, provided that it complies with all of the following additional
conditions for exemption:

(1) The large quantity generator has implemented pollution prevention practices that reduce
the amount of any hazardous substances, pollutants, or contaminants entering F006 or
otherwise released to the environment prior to its recycling;

(2) The F006 waste is legitimately recycled through metals recovery;

(3) No more than 20,000 kilograms of F006 waste is accumulated on site at any one time; and

(4) The F006 waste is managed in accordance with the following:

(i)(A) If the F006 waste is placed in containers, the large quantity generator must comply
with the applicable conditions for exemption in paragraph (a)(1) of this section; and/or

(B) If the F006 is placed in tanks, the large quantity generator must comply with the
applicable conditions for exemption of paragraph (a)(2) of this section; and/or

(C) If the F006 is placed in containment buildings, the large quantity generator must comply
with subpart DD of 40 CFR part 265, and has placed its professional engineer certification
that the building complies with the design standards specified in 40 CFR 265.1101 in the
facility's files prior to operation of the unit. The large quantity generator must maintain
the following records:

(1) A written description of procedures to ensure that the F006 waste remains in the unit
for no more than 180 days, a written description of the waste generation and management
practices for the facility showing that they are consistent with the 180-day limit, and
documentation that the large quantity generator is complying with the procedures; or

(2) Documentation that the unit is emptied at least once every 180 days.

(ii) The large quantity generator is exempt from all the requirements in subparts G and H of
40 CFR part 265, except for those referenced in paragraph (a)(8) of this section.

(iii) The date upon which each period of accumulation begins is clearly marked and must be
clearly visible for inspection on each container;

(iv) While being accumulated on site, each container and tank is labeled or marked clearly
with:

(A) The words “Hazardous Waste”; and

(B) An indication of the hazards of the contents (examples include, but are not limited to,
the applicable hazardous waste characteristic(s) (i.e., ignitable, corrosive, reactive,
toxic); hazard communication consistent with the Department of Transportation requirements
at 49 CFR part 172 subpart E (labeling) or subpart F (placarding); a hazard statement or
pictogram consistent with the Occupational Safety and Health Administration Hazard
Communication Standard at 29 CFR 1910.1200; or a chemical hazard label consistent with the
National Fire Protection Association code 704).

(v) The large quantity generator complies with the requirements in paragraphs(a)(6) and (7)
of this section.

(d) F006 transported over 200 miles. A large quantity generator who also generates
wastewater treatment sludges from electroplating operations that meet the listing
description for the EPA hazardous waste number F006, and who must transport this waste, or
offer this waste for transportation, over a distance of 200 miles or more for off-site
metals recovery, may accumulate F006 waste on site for more than 90 days, but not more than
270 days without being subject to parts 124, 264 through 267, and 270 of this chapter, and
the notification requirements of section 3010 of RCRA for treatment, storage, and disposal
facilities, if the large quantity generator complies with all of the conditions for
exemption of paragraphs (c)(1) through (4) of this section.

(e) F006 accumulation time extension. A large quantity generator accumulating F006 in
accordance with paragraphs (c) and (d) of this section who accumulates F006 waste on site
for more than 180 days (or for more than 270 days if the generator must transport this
waste, or offer this waste for transportation, over a distance of 200 miles or more), or who
accumulates more than 20,000 kilograms of F006 waste on site is an operator of a storage
facility and is subject to the requirements of 40 CFR parts 124, 264, 265, 267, and 270, and
the notification requirements of section 3010 of RCRA for treatment, storage, and disposal
facilities, unless the generator has been granted an extension to the 180-day (or 270-day if
applicable) period or an exception to the 20,000 kilogram accumulation limit. Such
extensions and exceptions may be granted by EPA if F006 waste must remain on site for longer
than 180 days (or 270 days if applicable) or if more than 20,000 kilograms of F006 waste
must remain on site due to unforeseen, temporary, and uncontrollable circumstances. An
extension of up to 30 days or an exception to the accumulation limit may be granted at the
discretion of the Regional Administrator on a case-by-case basis.

(f) Consolidation of hazardous waste received from very small quantity generators. Large
quantity generators may accumulate on site hazardous waste received from very small quantity
generators under control of the same person (as defined in § 260.10 of this subchapter),
without a storage permit or interim status and without complying with the requirements of
parts 124, 264 through 268, and 270 of this chapter, and the notification requirements of
section 3010 of RCRA for treatment, storage, and disposal facilities, provided that they
comply with the following conditions. “Control,” for the purposes of this section, means the
power to direct the policies of the generator, whether by the ownership of stock, voting
rights, or otherwise, except that contractors who operate generator facilities on behalf of
a different person shall not be deemed to “control” such generators.

(1) The large quantity generator notifies EPA at least thirty (30) days prior to receiving
the first shipment from a very small quantity generator(s) using EPA Form 8700-12; and

(i) Identifies on the form the name(s) and site address(es) for the very small quantity
generator(s) as well as the name and business telephone number for a contact person for the
very small quantity generator(s); and

(ii) Submits an updated Site ID form (EPA Form 8700-12) within 30 days after a change in the
name or site address for the very small quantity generator.

(2) The large quantity generator maintains records of shipments for three years from the
date the hazardous waste was received from the very small quantity generator. These records
must identify the name, site address, and contact information for the very small quantity
generator and include a description of the hazardous waste received, including the quantity
and the date the waste was received.

(3) The large quantity generator complies with the independent requirements identified in §
262.10(a)(1)(iii) and the conditions for exemption in this section for all hazardous waste
received from a very small quantity generator. For purposes of the labeling and marking
regulations in paragraph (a)(5) of this section, the large quantity generator must label the
container or unit with the date accumulation started (i.e., the date the hazardous waste was
received from the very small quantity generator). If the large quantity generator is
consolidating incoming hazardous waste from a very small quantity generator with either its
own hazardous waste or with hazardous waste from other very small quantity generators, the
large quantity generator must label each container or unit with the earliest date any
hazardous waste in the container was accumulated on site.

(g) Rejected load. A large quantity generator who sends a shipment of hazardous waste to a
designated facility with the understanding that the designated facility can accept and
manage the waste and later receives that shipment back as a rejected load or residue in
accordance with the manifest discrepancy provisions of § 264.72 or § 265.72 of this chapter
may accumulate the returned waste on site in accordance with paragraphs (a) and (b) of this
section. Upon receipt of the returned shipment, the generator must:

(1) Sign Item 18c of the manifest, if the transporter returned the shipment using the
original manifest; or

(2) Sign Item 20 of the manifest, if the transporter returned the shipment using a new
manifest.


----------------------------------------------------------------------


§ 262.20 General requirements.
------------------------------

(a)(1) Paper manifest. A generator that transports, or offers for transport a hazardous
waste for offsite treatment, storage, or disposal, or a treatment, storage, or disposal
facility that offers for transport a rejected hazardous waste load, must prepare a Manifest
(OMB Control number 2050-0039) on EPA Form 8700-22, and, if necessary, EPA Form 8700-22A.
Large and small quantity generators must register with the EPA's e-Manifest system to obtain
signed and dated copies of completed manifests from the EPA e-Manifest system and comply
with paragraph (a)(2) of this section.

(2) Post-receipt manifest data corrections. After facilities have certified that the
manifest is complete, by signing it at the time of submission to the EPA e-Manifest system,
any post-receipt data corrections may be submitted at any time by any interested person
(e.g., waste handler) named on the manifest. If corrections are requested by the Director
for portions of the manifest that a generator is required to complete, the generator must
address the data correction within 30 days from the date of the request. Data correction
submissions must be made electronically via the post-receipt data corrections process as
described in § 265.71(l) of this chapter, which applies to corrections made to either paper
or electronic manifests.

(3) Electronic manifest. In lieu of using the manifest form specified in paragraph (a)(1) of
this section, a person required to prepare a manifest under paragraph (a)(1) of this section
may prepare and use an electronic manifest, provided that the person:

(i) Complies with the requirements in § 262.24 for use of electronic manifests, and

(ii) Complies with the requirements of 40 CFR 3.10 for the reporting of electronic documents
to EPA.

(b) A generator must designate on the manifest one facility which is permitted to handle the
waste described on the manifest.

(c) A generator may also designate on the manifest one alternate facility which is permitted
to handle his waste in the event an emergency prevents delivery of the waste to the primary
designated facility.

(d) If the transporter is unable to deliver the hazardous waste to the designated facility
or the alternate facility, the generator must either designate another facility or instruct
the transporter to return the waste.

(e) The requirements of this subpart do not apply to hazardous waste produced by generators
of greater than 100 kg but less than 1000 kg in a calendar month where:

(1) The waste is reclaimed under a contractual agreement pursuant to which:

(i) The type of waste and frequency of shipments are specified in the agreement;

(ii) The vehicle used to transport the waste to the recycling facility and to deliver
regenerated material back to the generator is owned and operated by the reclaimer of the
waste; and

(2) The generator maintains a copy of the reclamation agreement in his files for a period of
at least three years after termination or expiration of the agreement.

(f) The requirements of this subpart and § 262.32(b) do not apply to the transport of
hazardous wastes on a public or private right-of-way within or along the border of
contiguous property under the control of the same person, even if such contiguous property
is divided by a public or private right-of-way. Notwithstanding 40 CFR 263.10(a), the
generator or transporter must comply with the requirements for transporters set forth in 40
CFR 263.30 and 263.31 in the event of a discharge of hazardous waste on a public or private
right-of-way.
