
--- page 1 ---
 
 
 
Please print or type. Form Approved. OMB No. 2050-0039 
UNIFORM HAZARDOUS 
WASTE MANIFEST 
1. Generator ID 
Number 
2. Page 1 of 3. Emergency Response Phone 4. Manifest Tracking Number 
5. Generator's Name and Mailing Address Generator's Site Address (if different than mailing address) 
 
 
Generator's Phone: 
6. Transporter 1 Company Name U.S. EPA ID Number 
 
7. Transporter 2 Company Name U.S. EPA ID Number 
 
8. Designated Facility Name and Site Address U.S. EPA ID Number 
 
 
 
Facility's Phone: 
9a. 
HM 
9b. U.S. DOT Description (including Proper Shipping Name, Hazard Class, ID Number, 
and Packing Group (if any)) 
1. 
 
 
 
2. 
 
 
 
3. 
 
 
 
4. 
10. Containers 
No. Type 
11. Total 
Quantity 
 
12. Unit 13. Waste Codes 
Wt./Vol. 
 
 
14. Special Handling Instructions and Additional Information 
 
 
 
 
 
15. GENERATOR’S/OFFEROR’S CERTIFICATION: I hereby declare that the contents of this consignment are fully and accurately described above by the proper shipping name, and are classified, packaged, 
marked and labeled/placarded, and are in all respects in proper condition for transport according to applicable international and national governmental regulations. If export shipment and I am the Primary 
Exporter, I certify that the contents of this consignment conform to the terms of the attached EPA Acknowledgment of Consent. 
I certify that the waste minimization statement identified in 40 CFR 262.27(a) (if I am a large quantity generator) or (b) (if I am a small quantity generator) is true. 
Generator's/Offeror's Printed/Typed Name Signature Month Day Year 
 
16. International Shipments  
Import to U.S. Export from U.S. Port of entry/exit:     
Transporter signature (for exports only): Date leaving U.S.: 
17. Transporter Acknowledgment of Receipt of Materials 
Transporter 1 Printed/Typed Name Signature Month Day Year 
 
Transporter 2 Printed/Typed Name Signature Month Day Year 
 
18. Discrepancy 
18a. Discrepancy Indication Space Quantity Type 
 
 
Residue 
 
 
Partial Rejection 
 
 
Full Rejection 
 
 
18b. Alternate Facility (or Generator) 
Manifest Reference Number:  
U.S. EPA ID Number 
 
Facility's Phone: 
18c. Signature of Alternate Facility (or Generator) Month Day Year 
 
 
119. . Hazardous Waste Report Management Method Codes (i.e., codes for hazardous waste treatment, disposal, and recycling systems) 
1. 2. 3. 4. 
 
20. Designated Facility Owner or Operator: Certification of receipt of hazardous materials covered by the manifest except as noted in Item 18a 
Printed/Typed Name Signature Month Day Year 
 
EPA Form 8700-22 (Rev. 12-17) Previous editions are obsolete. DESIGNATED FACILITY TO EPA's e-MANIFEST SYSTEM 
DESIGNATED FACILITY TR ANSPORTER   INT'L GENERATOR 
--- page 2 ---
Hazardous Waste Manifest Instructions  
 
What are the instructions for completing the manifest form (EPA Form 8700 -22)? 
 
Read all instructions before completing the form.  
  
1. Federal regulations require generators and transporters of  hazardous waste and owners or 
operators of receiving facilities designated on the manifest to complete this form (EPA 
Form 8700–22) and, if necessary, the continuation sheet (EPA Form 8700 –22A) for both 
inter- and intrastate transportation of hazardous waste.  
 
2.  This manifest reflects formatting changes  made by U.S. EPA in December 2017. 
Beginning on June 30, 2018, this manifest (Revision 12 -17) must be used and all 
previous editions are prohibited. Go to www.epa.gov/e-manifest for additional 
information. 
 
3.  This form must be purchased from a registered printer 
(https://www.epa.gov/hwgenerators/approved -registered-printers-epas-manifest-
registry#how) and has been designed to be filled out using standard computer printers; a  
firm point pen may also be used —press down hard. After June 30, 2018, this form can 
also be completed electronically in EPA’s e -Manifest system. 
 
I. Instructions for Generators 
 
Item 1.  Generator’s U.S. EPA Identification Number  
 
Enter the generator’s U.S. EPA twelve -digit identification number, or the state generator 
identification number if the generator site does not have an EPA identificatio n number. 
 
Item 2.  Page 1 of ___  
 
Enter the total number of pages used to complete the manifest ( i.e., the first page (EPA Form 
8700-22) plus the number of continuation sheets (EPA Form 8700 -22A), if any). 
 
Item 3.  Emergency Response Phone Number  
 
Enter a phone number for which emergency response information can be obtained in the event of 
an incident during transportation.  The emergency response phone number must:  
 
1. Be the number of the generator or the number of an agency or organization who is 
capable of and accepts responsibility for providing detailed information about the 
shipment; 
 
2. Reach a phone that is monitored 24 hours a day at all times the waste is in transportation 
(including transportation related storage); and  
 
--- page 3 ---
3. Reach someone who is either knowledgeable of the hazardous waste being shipped and 
has comprehensive emergency response and spill cleanup/incident mitigation information 
for the material being shipped or has immediate access to a person who has that 
knowledge and informat ion about the shipment. 
 
Note:  Emergency Response phone number information should only be entered in Item 3 when 
there is one phone number that applies to all the waste materials described in Item 9b.  If a 
situation (e.g., consolidated shipments) arises where more than one Emergency Response phone 
number applies to the various wastes listed on the manifest, the phone numbers associated with 
each specific material should be entered after its description in Item 9b.  
 
Item 4.  Manifest Tracking Number  
 
This unique tracking number must be pre -printed on the manifest by the forms printer.  
 
Item 5.  Generator’s Mailing Address, Phone Number and Site Address  
 
Enter the name of the generator, the mailing address to which the completed manifest signed by 
the designated facility should be mailed, and the generator’s telephone number.  Note, the 
telephone number (including area code) should be the normal business number for the generator, 
or the number where the generator or his authorized agent may be reached to provide instructions 
in the event the designated and/or alternate (if any) facility rejects some or all of the shipment. 
Also enter the physical site address from which the shipment originates only if this address is 
different than the mailing address.  
 
Item 6.  Transporter 1 Company Name, and U.S. EPA ID Number  
 
Enter the company name and U.S. EPA ID number of the first transporter who will transport the 
waste. Vehicle or driver information may not be entered here.  
 
Item 7.  Transporter 2 Company Name and U.S. EPA ID Number  
 
If applicable, enter the company name and U.S. EPA ID number of the second transporter who 
will transport the waste. Vehicle or driver information may not be entered here.  
 
If more than two transporters are needed, use a continuation sheet(s) (EPA Form 8700 -22A). 
 
Item 8.  Designated Facility Name, Site Ad dress, and U.S. EPA ID Number  
 
Enter the company name and site address of the facility designated to receive the waste listed on 
the manifest. Also enter the facility’s phone number and the U.S. EPA twelve -digit identification 
number of the facility. 
 
Item 9.  U.S. DOT Description (Including Proper Shipping Name, Hazard Class or Division, 
Identification Number, and Packing Group)  
 
--- page 4 ---
Item 9a.  If the wastes identified in Item 9b consist of both hazardous and nonhazardous 
materials, then identify the hazardous materials by entering an “X” in this Item next to 
the corresponding hazardous material identified in Item 9b.  
 
Item 9b.  Enter the U.S. DOT Proper Shipping Name, Hazard Class or Division, 
Identification Number (UN/NA) and Packing Group for each wa ste as identified in 49 
CFR 172. Include technical name(s) and reportable quantity references, if applicable.  
 
Note:  If additional space is needed for waste descriptions, enter these additional descriptions in 
Item 27 on the continuation sheet (EPA Form 8 700-22A). Also, if more than one Emergency 
Response phone number applies to the various wastes described in either Item 9b or Item 27, 
enter applicable Emergency Response phone numbers immediately following the shipping 
descriptions for those Items.  
 
Item 10.  Containers (Number and Type)  
 
Enter the number of containers for each waste and the appropriate abbreviation from Table I 
(below) for the type of container.  
 
Table I.  Types of Containers   
BA = Burlap, cloth, paper, or plastic bags.  
 
DT = Dump truck. 
 
CF = Fiber or plastic boxes, cartons, cases.  
 
DW = Wooden drums, barrels, kegs.  
 
CM = Metal boxes, cartons, cases (including 
roll-offs). 
 
HG = Hopper or gondola cars.  
 
CW = Wooden boxes, cartons, cases.  
 
TC = Tank cars 
 
CY = Cylinders. 
 
TP = Portable tanks. 
 
DF = Fiberboard or plastic drums, barrels, kegs.  
 
TT = Cargo tanks (tank trucks). 
 
DM = Metal drums, barrels, kegs.  
 
 
 
Item 11.  Total Quantity  
 
Enter, in designated boxes, the total quantity of waste.  Round partial units to the nearest whole 
unit, and do not enter decimals or fractions.  To the extent practical, report quantities using 
appropriate units of measure that will allow you to report quantities with precision.  Waste 
quantities entered should be based  on actual measurements or reasonably accurate estimates of 
actual quantities shipped. Container capacities are not acceptable as estimates.  
 
--- page 5 ---
Item 12.  Units of Measure (Weight/Volume)  
 
Enter, in designated boxes, the appropriate abbreviation from  Table II (below) for the unit of 
measure. 
 
Table II.  Units of Measure   
G = Gallons (liquids only) 
 
N = Cubic Meters 
 
K = Kilograms 
 
P = Pounds  
 
L = Liters (liquids only) 
 
T = Tons (2000 Pounds)  
 
M = Metric Tons (1000 Kilograms)  
 
Y = Cubic Yards  
 
Note:  Tons, Metric Tons, Cubic Meters, and Cubic Yards should only be reported in 
connection with very large bulk shipments, such as rail cars, tank trucks, or barges.  
 
Item 13.  Waste Codes  
 
Enter up to six federal and state waste codes to describe each waste  stream identified in Item 9b.  
State waste codes that are not redundant with federal codes must be entered here, in addition to 
the federal waste codes which are most representative of the properties of the waste.  
 
Item 14.  Special Handling Instructions and Additional Information 
 
1. Generators may enter any special handling or shipment -specific information necessary 
for the proper management or tracking of the materials under the generator’s or other 
handler’s business processes, such as waste profile nu mbers, container codes, bar codes, 
or response guide numbers.  Generators also may use this space to enter additional 
descriptive information about their shipped materials, such as chemical names, 
constituent percentages, physical state, or specific gravity  of wastes identified with 
volume units in Item 12. 
 
2. This space may be used to record limited types of federally required information for 
which there is no specific space provided on the manifest, including any alternate facility 
designations; the manif est tracking number of the original manifest for rejected wastes 
and residues that are re-shipped under a second manifest; and the specification of PCB 
waste descriptions and PCB out -of-service dates required under 40 CFR 761.207.  
Generators, however, cannot be required to enter information in this space to meet state 
regulatory requirements. 
 
--- page 6 ---
Item 15.  Generator’s/Offeror’s Certifications  
 
1.  The generator must read, sign, and date the waste minimization certification statement.  
In signing the waste minimization certification statement, those generators who have not 
been exempted by statute or regulation from the duty to make a waste minimization 
certification under section 3002(b) of RCRA are also certifying that they have complied 
with the waste minimization requirements.  The Generator’s Certification also contains 
the required attestation that the shipment has been properly prepared and is in proper 
condition for transportation (the shipper’s certification).  The content of the shipper’s 
certification statement is as follows:  “I hereby declare that the contents of this 
consignment are fully and accurately described above by the proper shipping name, and 
are classified, packaged, marked, and labeled/placarded, and are in all respects in proper 
condition for transport according to applicable international and national governmental 
regulations. If export shipment and I am the Primary Exporter, I certify that the contents 
of this consignment conform to the terms of the attached EPA Acknowledgment of 
Consent.” When a party other than the generator prepares the shipment for transportation, 
this party may also sign the shipper’s certification statement as the offeror of the 
shipment. 
 
2.  Generator or Offeror personnel may preprint the words, “On behalf of” in the signature 
block or may hand write this statement in the signature block prior to signing the 
generator/offeror certification, to indicate that the individual signs as the employee  or 
agent of the named principal.   
 
Note:  All of the above information except the handwritten signature required in Item 15 may be 
pre-printed. 
 
II. Instructions for International Shipment Block  
 
Item 16.  International Shipments  
 
For export shipments, the primary exporter must check the export box, and enter the point of exit 
(city and state) from the United States. For import shipments, the importer must check the import 
box and enter the point of entry (city and state) into the United States.  For exports, the 
transporter must sign and date the manifest to indicate the day the shipment left the United 
States. Transporters of hazardous waste shipments must deliver a copy of the manifest to the 
U.S. Customs when exporting the waste across U.S. borders.  
 
--- page 7 ---
III. Instructions for Transporters 
 
Item 17.  Transporters’ Acknowledgments of Receipt  
 
Enter the name of the person accepting the waste on behalf of the first transporter.  That person 
must acknowledge acceptance of the waste described on the man ifest by signing and entering the 
date of receipt. Only one signature per transportation company is required.  Signatures are not 
required to track the movement of wastes in and out of transfer facilities, unless there is a change 
of custody between transpo rters. 
 
If applicable, enter the name of the person accepting the waste on behalf of the second 
transporter. That person must acknowledge acceptance of the waste described on the manifest by 
signing and entering the date of receipt.  
 
Note:  Transporters carrying imports, who are acting as importers, may have responsibilities to 
enter information in the International Shipments Block.  Transporters carrying exports may  
also have responsibilities to enter information in the International Shipments Block.  See above 
instructions for Item 16. 
 
This manifest reflects formatting changes made by U.S. EPA in December 2017. Beginning on 
June 30, 2018, this manifest (Revision 12 -17) must be used and all previous editions are 
prohibited. Go to www.epa.gov/e-manifest for additional information. 
 
IV. Instructions for Owners and Operators of Receiving Facilities Designated On the 
Manifest 
 
Item 18.  Discrepancy  
 
Item 18a.  Discrepancy Indication Space 
 
1. The authorized representative of the designated (or alternate) facility’s owner or operator 
must note in this space any discrepancies between the waste described on the manifest 
and the waste actually received at the facility.  Manifest discrepancies are: significant 
differences (as defined by §§ 264.72(b) and 265.72(b)) between the quantity or type of 
hazardous waste designated on the manifest or shipping paper, and the quantity and type 
of hazardous waste a facility actually receives, rejected wa stes, which may be a full or 
partial shipment of hazardous waste that the facility cannot accept, or container residues, 
which are residues that exceed the quantity limits for “empty” containers set forth in 40 
CFR 261.7(b). 
 
--- page 8 ---
2. For rejected loads and residues (40 CFR 264.72(d), (e), and (f), or 40 CFR 265.72(d), (e), 
or (f)), check the appropriate box if the shipment is a rejected load ( i.e., rejected by the 
designated and/or alternate facility and is sent to an alternate facility or returned to the 
generator) or a regulated residue that cannot be removed from a container.  Enter the 
reason for the rejection or the inability to remove the residue and a description of the 
waste. Also, reference the manifest tracking number for any additional manifests being 
used to track the rejected waste or residue shipment on the original manifest.  Indicate the 
original manifest tracking number in Item 14, the Special Handling Block and Additional 
Information Block of the additional manifests.  
3. Owners or operators of faci lities located in unauthorized states ( i.e., states in which the 
U.S. EPA administers the hazardous waste management program) who cannot resolve 
significant differences in quantity or type within 15 days of receiving the waste must 
submit to their Regional Administrator a letter with a copy of the manifest at issue 
describing the discrepancy and attempts to reconcile it (40 CFR 264.72(c) and 265.72(c)).  
 
4. Owners or operators of facilities located in authorized states ( i.e., those states that have 
received authorization from the U.S. EPA to administer the hazardous waste management 
program) should contact their state agency for information on where to report 
discrepancies involving “significant differences” to state officials.  
 
Item 18b.  Alternate Facility  (or Generator) for Receipt of Full Load Rejections  
 
Enter the name, address, phone number, and EPA Identification Number of the Alternate Facility 
which the rejecting facility has designated, after consulting with the generator, to receive a fully 
rejected waste shipment. In the event that a fully rejected shipment is being returned to the 
generator, the rejecting facility may enter the generator’s site information in this space.  This field 
is not to be used to forward partially rejected loads or residue w aste shipments. 
 
Item 18c.  Alternate Facility (or Generator) Signature  
 
The authorized representative of the alternate facility (or the generator in the event of a returned 
shipment) must sign and date this field of the form to acknowledge receipt of the fully rejected 
wastes or residues identified by the initial facility. 
 
Item 19.  Hazardous Waste Report Management Method Codes  
 
Enter the most appropriate Hazardous Waste Report Management Method code for each waste 
listed in Item 9. The Hazardous Waste Report Management Method code is to be entered by the 
first facility that receives the waste and is the code that best describes the way in which the waste 
is to be managed when received by the facility. 
 
Item 20.  Designated Facility O wner or Operator Certification of Receipt (Except As Noted in 
Item 18a) 
 
Enter the name of the person receiving the waste on behalf of the owner or operator of the 
facility. That person must acknowledge receipt or rejection of the waste described on the 
--- page 9 ---
manifest by signing and entering the date of receipt or rejection where indicated.  Since the 
Facility Certification acknowledges receipt of the waste except as noted in the Discrepancy 
Space in Item 18a, the certification should be signed for both waste rece ipt and waste rejection, 
with the rejection being noted and described in the space provided in Item 18a.  Fully rejected 
wastes may be forwarded or returned using Item 18b after consultation with the generator.  Enter 
the name of the person accepting the was te on behalf of the owner or operator of the alternate 
facility or the original generator.  That person must acknowledge receipt or rejection of the waste 
described on the manifest by signing and entering the date they received or rejected the waste in 
Item 18c. Partially rejected wastes and residues must be re -shipped under a new manifest, to be 
initiated and signed by the rejecting facility as offeror of the shipment. 
 
Note: The e-Manifest Act mandates several changes to the federal manifest program. Beginning 
on June 30, 2018: 
• This manifest (Revision 12-17) must be used and all previous editions are prohibited.  
• Any facility (e.g., a RCRA-permitted facility, Subtitle D facility) that receives a manifest 
accompanying a state-only regulated waste must com ply with 40 CFR 264.71 or 265.71 
(use of the manifest) and 40 CFR 264.72 or 265.72 (manifest discrepancies).  
• Any facility that receives a paper manifest accompanying a federally regulated waste or 
state-only regulated waste must submit the top co py (Page 1) of the manifest and any 
continuation sheets to the U.S. EPA’s e -Manifest system within 30 days. The copies must 
be submitted in an acceptable format. Submissions must be made at the mailing address or 
electronic mail/submission address specifie d at the e-Manifest program website’s directory 
of services (see www.epa.gov/e-manifest)   
• The facility will be assessed a fee for each manifest copy submitted.  
• Go to www.epa.gov/e-manifest for the directory of services and additional information.  
 
  
--- page 10 ---
What are the instructions for completing the continuation sheet (EPA Form 8700 -22A)? 
 
Read all instructions before completing the form.   
 
Federal regulations require ge nerators and transporters of hazardous waste and owners or 
operators of receiving facilities designated on the manifest to use the  uniform hazardous waste 
manifest (EPA Form 8700-22) and, if necessary, this continuation sheet (EPA Form 8700 -22A) 
for both interstate and intrastate transportation. This form must be used as a continuation sheet to 
U.S. EPA Form 8700-22 if: 
 
· More than two transporters are to be used to transport the waste; or  
 
· More space is required for the U.S. DOT descriptions and related information in Item 9 
of U.S. EPA Form 8700 -22. 
 
This continuation sheet reflects formatting changes made by U.S. EPA in December 2017. 
Beginning on June 30, 2018, this continuation sheet (Revision  12-17) must be used and all 
previous editions are prohibited. Go to www.epa.gov/e-manifest for additional information. 
 
This form must be purchased from a registered printer 
(https://www.epa.gov/hwgenerators/approved -registered-printers-epas-manifest-registry#how) 
and has been designed to be filled out using standard comp uter printers; a firm point pen may 
also be used—press down hard. After June 30, 2018, this form can also be completed 
electronically in EPA’s e-Manifest system. 
 
I. Generators 
 
Item 21.  Generator’s ID Number  
 
Enter the generator’s U.S. EPA twelve -digit identification number or, the state generator 
identification number if the generator site does not have an EPA identification number.  
 
Item 22.  Page ___  
 
Enter the page number of the continuation sheet.  
 
Item 23.  Manifest Tracking Number  
 
Enter the Manifest Tracking Number from Item 4 of the manifest form to which the continuation 
sheet is attached. 
 
Item 24.  Generator’s Name — 
 
Enter the generator’s name as it appears in Item 5 on the first page of the manifest.  
 
--- page 11 ---
Item 25.  Transporter—Company Name 
 
If additional transporters are used to transport the waste described on the manifest, enter the 
company name of each additional transporter in the order in which they will transport the  
waste. Enter after the word “Transporter” t he order of the transporter.  For example, Transporter 
3 Company Name. Also enter the U.S. EPA twelve-digit identification number of the transporter 
described in Item 25. 
 
Item 26.  Transporter —Company Name 
 
If additional transporters are used to transport the waste described on the manifest, enter the 
company name of each additional transporter in the order in which they will transport the waste.  
Enter after the word “Transporter” the order of the transporter.  For example, Transporter 4 
Company Name. Each continuation sheet can record the names of two additional transporters.  
Also enter the U.S. EPA twelve -digit identification number of the transporter named in Item 26.  
 
Item 27.  U.S. D.O.T. Description Including Proper Shipping Name, Hazardous Class, and  ID 
Number (UN/NA) 
 
For each row enter a sequential number under Item 27b that corresponds to the order of waste 
codes from one continuation sheet to the next, to reflect the total number of wastes being 
shipped. Refer to instructions for Item 9 of the man ifest for the information to be entered.  
 
Item 28.  Containers (No. And Type)  
 
Refer to the instructions for Item 10 of the manifest for information to be entered.  
 
Item 29.  Total Quantity  
 
Refer to the instructions for Item 11 of the manifest form.  
 
Item 30.  Units of Measure (Weight/Volume)  
 
Refer to the instructions for Item 12 of the manifest form.  
 
Item 31.  Waste Codes  
 
Refer to the instructions for Item 13 of the manifest form.  
 
Item 32.  Special Handling Instructions and Additional Information 
 
Refer to the instructions for Item 14 of the manifest form.  
 
--- page 12 ---
II. Transporters 
 
Item 33.  Transporter —Acknowledgment of Receipt of Materials  
 
Enter the same number of the Transporter as identified in Item 25.  Enter also the name of the  
person accepting the waste on behalf of the Transporter (Company Name) identified in Item 25.  
That person must acknowledge acceptance of the waste described on the manifest by signing and 
entering the date of receipt.  
 
Item 34.  Transporter —Acknowledgment of Receipt of Materials 
 
Enter the same number of the Transporter as identified in Item 26.  Enter also the name of the 
person accepting the waste on behalf of the Transporter (Company Name) identified in Item 26.  
That person must acknowledge acceptance of the waste described on the manifest by signing and 
entering the date of receipt.  
 
III. Owner and Operators of Treatment, Storage, or Disposal Facilities  
 
Item 35.  Discrepancy Indication Space  
 
Refer to Item 18. This space may be used to more fully desc ribe information on discrepancies 
identified in Item 18a of the manifest form.  
 
Item 36.  Hazardous Waste Report Management Method Codes  
 
For each field in Item 36, enter the sequential number that corresponds to the waste materials 
described under Item 27, and enter the appropriate process code that describes how the materials 
will be processed when received.  If additional continuation sheets are attached, continue 
numbering the waste materials and process code fields sequentially, and enter on each  sheet the 
process codes corresponding to the waste materials identified on that sheet.  
 
 
 
 