
--- page 1 ---
85736 Federal Register / Vol. 81, No. 228 / Monday, November 28, 2016 / Rules and Regulations 
9 EPA is renaming CESQGs to VSQGs (very small 
quantity generators). For a detailed discussion on 
this change, see section VII.A of this preamble. 
will be to ensure all stakeholders are 
trained on the new organization and are 
given an opportunity to revise forms, 
guidance, and other materials as 
necessary. EPA will also be revising its 
own materials to reflect the new 
citations in the regulations. 
EPA is finalizing the following 
general organizational changes: 
(1) Integrating the generator 
regulations in § 261.5 into the generator 
regulations at part 262 by moving 
§ 261.5 (which contains the regulations 
applicable to VSQGs, counting of 
hazardous waste, and mixing of 
hazardous wastes with non-hazardous 
wastes); 
(2) Separating the existing regulations 
at § 262.34 for SQGs, LQGs and SAAs 
into three new sections: 
(a) Conditions for exemption for 
satellite accumulation areas (SAA) for 
small and large quantity generators, 
(b) Conditions for exemption for an 
SQG that accumulates hazardous waste; 
and 
(c) Conditions for exemption for an 
LQG that accumulates hazardous waste; 
(3) Using subtitles in these new 
sections; and 
(4) Where reasonable, incorporating 
the text of relevant part 265 regulations 
into these new sections, rather than 
merely cross referencing them, as was 
the former approach. 
A. Moving and Integrating Regulations 
From 40 CFR 261.5 Into 40 CFR Part 262 
Historically, certain hazardous waste 
generator regulations have been located 
in a different part of the regulations (40 
CFR 261.5) from the rest of the generator 
regulations (40 CFR part 262). Many of 
the commenters on the proposal 
confirmed what EPA had heard from 
stakeholders who stated that the 
location of § 261.5 was confusing and 
not user-friendly. Many commenters 
agreed that locating those requirements 
in part 262 to consolidate all the 
generator regulations in the same part 
was a useful revision that will alleviate 
much confusion in the regulated 
community and, in the process, will 
foster greater compliance with the 
regulations. 
Specifically, EPA is moving the 
definition of a VSQG that generates non- 
acute hazardous waste at § 261.5(a) into 
the VSQG definition at § 260.10, moving 
§ 261.5(c) through (e) about counting 
hazardous waste and § 261.5(h) though 
(j) about VSQGs mixing waste to a new 
section at § 262.13 titled ‘‘Generator 
category determination’’ and moving 
§ 261.5(b) and (f) and (g) to a new 
section at § 262.14 titled ‘‘Conditions for 
exemption for a very small quantity 
generator.’’
9 
1. Hazardous Waste Generation 
Quantity Limits for VSQGs (40 CFR 
260.10) 
Section 261.5(a) was previously used 
to set forth the non-acute hazardous 
waste quantity limits for a VSQG and 
§ 261.5(e) to provide quantity limits for 
generating acute hazardous waste and 
any residue or contaminated soil, waste, 
or other debris resulting from the 
cleanup of a spill of acute hazardous 
waste. Under the reorganized 
regulations, EPA now defines each 
category of generator at § 260.10, and, 
thus, § 261.5(a) and (e) are incorporated 
into those definitions. 
2. Determining Generator Category (40 
CFR 262.13) 
Section 261.5(c) and (d) previously set 
forth the provisions for a hazardous 
waste generator to use in making its 
generator category determination. Every 
hazardous waste generator must because 
determine its generator category in order 
to identify which regulations are 
applicable to it. Because § 261.5(c) and 
(d) are applicable to all hazardous waste 
generators, it makes sense to move them 
into 40 CFR part 262, with the other 
hazardous waste generator regulations. 
To further aid in making the regulations 
more user friendly, the Agency has 
promulgated a new section for generator 
category determination at § 262.13, 
titled ‘‘Generator category 
determination.’’ This new section is 
thus located because, after a generator of 
a solid waste determines it has 
generated a hazardous waste (§ 262.11), 
the generator must then determine its 
hazardous waste generator category for 
the calendar month. 
In addition, § 261.5(h) through (j), 
regarding the rules that apply for the 
mixing of hazardous waste with solid 
waste, including mixtures with used oil 
by VSQGs, have been relocated to 
§ 262.13, making them independent 
requirements rather than conditions for 
exemption. This move is logical in the 
context of the reorganization because 
the outcome of any determination a 
VSQG makes about the consequences of 
mixing waste ultimately affect its 
generator category first. In addition, 
§ 262.13 also contains a new citation to 
the mixing rule in § 261.3 and makes it 
clear that the mixing rule applies to 
SQGs and LQGs. These revisions to the 
generator regulations are all discussed 
in more depth later in this preamble. 
Table 1—Crosswalk of Previous 
Citations to New Citations for 
Definitions and General Standards 
provides a summary of the crosswalk 
between the previous and new 
regulatory citations for determining a 
generator’s category. 
TABLE 1—C ROSSWALK OF PREVIOUS CITATIONS TO NEW CITATIONS FOR DEFINITIONS AND GENERAL STANDARDS 
Regulation Previous citation New citation Comment 
Definitions of Generator Cat-
egories.
§§ 260.10, 261.5 and 262.34 ........ § 260.10 ........................................ Previous definition of SQG in 
§ 260.10 was outdated. Gener-
ator categories were based on 
§§ 261.5 and 262.34. 
Hazardous Waste Limits for 
VSQGs.
§ 261.5(a) and (e) ......................... § 260.10 ........................................ Included in the new definition of 
VSQG. 
Purpose, Scope, and Applicability § 262.10 ........................................ § 262.10 ........................................ Not moved, but expanded signifi-
cantly. 
Hazardous Waste Determination 
and Recordkeeping.
§§ 262.11 and 262.40(c) ............... § 262.11 ........................................ Content in § 262.11 is expanded 
and § 262.40(c) is incorporated. 
VerDate Sep<11>2014 20:32 Nov 25, 2016 Jkt 241001 PO 00000 Frm 00006 Fmt 4701 Sfmt 4700 E:\FR\FM\28NOR3.SGM 28NOR3mstockstill on DSK3G9T082PROD with RULES3
--- page 2 ---
85737 Federal Register / Vol. 81, No. 228 / Monday, November 28, 2016 / Rules and Regulations 
TABLE 1—C ROSSWALK OF PREVIOUS CITATIONS TO NEW CITATIONS FOR DEFINITIONS AND GENERAL STANDARDS— 
Continued 
Regulation Previous citation New citation Comment 
Generator Category Determination § 261.5(c), (d), and (h)–(j) ............ § 262.13 ........................................ New sect ion that explains how to 
count hazardous waste to de-
termine generator category. 
EPA Identification Numbers ........... § 262.12 ........................................ § 262.18 .................................... .... Re-notification requirements are 
also in this section. 
Landfill Ban for Liquids .................. § 258.28 ........................................ § 262.35 ........................................ For SQGs and LQGs. 
3. VSQG Conditions for Exemption (40 
CFR 262.14) 
Previous sections 261.5(b) and (f) 
through (j) established the regulations 
for VSQGs when accumulating acute 
and non-acute hazardous waste, 
identified where the acute and non- 
acute hazardous waste may be managed 
off site, and explained the implications 
of mixing hazardous waste with solid 
waste or used oil. Since these 
regulations set forth conditions for 
exemption for VSQGs, similar to how 
the regulations found in previous 
§ 262.34 set forth conditions for 
exemption for SQGs and LQGs, EPA is 
moving § 261.5(b) and (f) and (g) to the 
newly created § 262.14 titled, 
‘‘Conditions for exemption for a very 
small quantity generator.’’ All the 
conditions for exemption for generators 
are now located parallel to one another 
in part 262. Section 262.14 also includes 
the VSQG landfill ban for liquids and a 
new VSQG consolidation provision by 
LQGs under the control of the same 
person. 
In addition, VSQGs who episodically 
generate higher amounts of hazardous 
waste may follow the newly 
promulgated standards for episodic 
generation in part 262 subpart L in order 
to maintain their VSQG status while 
managing these higher amounts of 
hazardous waste. Table 2—Crosswalk of 
Previous Citations to New Citations for 
VSQGs provides a crosswalk between 
the previous and the new VSQG 
conditions for exemption. 
TABLE 2—C ROSSWALK OF PREVIOUS CITATIONS TO NEW CITATIONS FOR VSQGS 
Regulation Previous citation New citation Comment 
VSQG Definition ............................ § 261.5(a) ...................................... § 260.10 .............................. .......... Moved into new definition of 
VSQG. 
VSQG Mixtures .............................. § 261.5(h)–(j) ................................. § 262.13(f) ............................ ......... Moved into Generator category 
determination. 
Conditions for Exemption for a 
Very Small Quantity Generator.
§ 261.5(b), (f), and (g) .................. § 262.14 ........................................ Included in VSQG conditions for 
exemption. 
VSQG Consolidation by LQGs 
Within the Same Company.
N/A ................................................ § 262.14(a)(5)(viii) ......................... New provision. 
Landfill Ban for Liquids .................. § 258.28 ........................................ § 262.14(b) .................................... Specific citation for VSQGs. 
Episodic Generation ...................... N/A ................................................ Part 262 subpart L ........................ New provision. 
B. SQG and LQG Conditions for 
Exemption (40 CFR 262.16 and 262.17) 
SQGs and LQGs may accumulate their 
hazardous waste on site without 
complying with the storage facility 
permit and operating requirements, 
provided they follow all of the 
conditions for exemption established 
originally in § 262.34. Section 262.34 
became difficult to navigate because the 
SQG and LQG conditions for exemption 
were intertwined and contained many 
cross-references to sections in 40 CFR 
part 265. Therefore, the Agency is 
dividing § 262.34 into three new 
sections at §§ 262.15, 262.16 and 262.17. 
Section 262.15 lays out the conditions 
for exemption for SQGs and LQGs 
operating an SAA, § 262.16 identifies 
conditions for exemption for SQGs, and 
§ 262.17 identifies the conditions for 
exemption for LQGs. 
1. Satellite Accumulation Area 
Conditions for Exemption for SQGs and 
LQGs (40 CFR 262.15) 
Many generators use SAAs at their 
sites. These areas allow generators to 
accumulate hazardous waste near the 
point of generation under the control of 
the operator of the process generating 
the waste, which provides for efficiency 
and greater safety in the handling of 
hazardous waste. When the generator 
has accumulated 55 gallons of 
hazardous waste (or one quart of acute 
hazardous waste) in the SAA, the 
generator must then move the hazardous 
waste to the 90- or 180-day central 
accumulation area within three days. 
Under the old framework, the 
conditions for exemption for operating 
an SAA were located at § 262.34(c), 
between the hazardous waste 
accumulation conditions for LQGs and 
those for SQGs. This created confusion 
as to whether the provisions apply to 
LQGs only or to both SQGs and LQGs. 
In this final rule, the Agency is therefore 
moving 40 CFR 262.34(c) into its own 
section at § 262.15 titled, ‘‘Satellite 
accumulation area regulations for small 
and large quantity generators.’’ 
Additionally, the Agency is copying 
the text in §§ 265.171, 265.172 and 
265.173(a) (which previously were 
simply referenced in § 262.34(c)(1)(i)) 
into § 262.15 in order to eliminate cross- 
referencing and improve the user 
friendliness of the regulations. Table 3— 
Crosswalk of Previous Citations to New 
Citations for SAAs provides a summary 
of the crosswalk between previous and 
new regulations for SAAs. 
VerDate Sep<11>2014 20:32 Nov 25, 2016 Jkt 241001 PO 00000 Frm 00007 Fmt 4701 Sfmt 4700 E:\FR\FM\28NOR3.SGM 28NOR3mstockstill on DSK3G9T082PROD with RULES3
--- page 3 ---
85742 Federal Register / Vol. 81, No. 228 / Monday, November 28, 2016 / Rules and Regulations 
13 The Solid Waste Disposal Act as Amended by 
the Hazardous and Solid Waste Amendments of 
1984, Section 3001(d). 
14 51 FR 10154, March 24, 1986. 
15 This table is being finalized in the regulations 
as Table 1 to § 262.13. 
hazardous waste generator system. In 
addition, EPA believes that the meaning 
of ‘‘greater than’’ and ‘‘less than’’ is 
clear without the use of the arithmetic 
symbols. 
Finally, EPA does not agree with the 
commenters who stated that it would be 
appropriate to allow a generator to 
average hazardous waste generation 
over several months and use the average 
to determine its generator category. 
Beyond the practical implementation 
concerns with this approach, and 
despite the commenters’ argument that 
this approach would be consistent with 
the statute’s intent, EPA has long 
interpreted the RCRA statement that a 
generator’s category be based on the 
amount of waste generated ‘‘during a 
calendar month’’ at face value: The 
generator must know the quantity of 
hazardous waste it generates per month, 
not as an average of some sort, and be 
regulated accordingly.
13 EPA rejected 
similar approaches in the March 24, 
1986, final rule that established the 
current small quantity generator 
regulations and is not changing that 
interpretation as a part of this 
rulemaking.
14 
EPA does agree with the comment 
that any acute hazardous waste cleaned 
up in debris is counted as part of the 
‘‘residue or contaminated soil, water, or 
other debris resulting from the cleanup 
of a spill . . . of any acute hazardous 
waste’’ and is not counted separately as 
acute hazardous waste. 
Regarding ‘‘conditionally exempt 
small quantity generators,’’ EPA 
received comments on the proposal 
arguing that the users of the term 
‘‘conditionally exempt small quantity 
generator’’ are familiar with its meaning 
and do not need a revision and that 
states will need to update materials and 
forms with the new term, VSQG. EPA 
has determined that although the users 
of the regulation are familiar with this 
term as it is used currently, there is real 
value in revising it so that those who 
will be introduced to the RCRA 
generator program in the future can 
make more sense of the terms. As stated 
previously, EPA will be revising its own 
materials, as necessary, to account for 
the new term and will work with states 
to phase in the changed terminology 
over time. 
Effect of the Reorganization: This 
section is not affected by the 
reorganization. 
B. Generators That Generate Both Acute 
and Non-Acute Hazardous Waste in the 
Same Calendar Month (40 CFR 260.10) 
1. Introduction 
As stated previously in the discussion 
of the definitions of the categories, 
when a generator is determining its 
generator category, it must consider 
three relevant types of hazardous waste: 
Hazardous waste (or ‘‘non-acute 
hazardous waste,’’ for purposes of this 
discussion), acute hazardous waste, and 
residues from the cleanup of a spill of 
acute hazardous waste. Historically, the 
RCRA hazardous waste regulations have 
not addressed situations involving 
combinations of wastes and Agency 
statements about this issue have been 
inconsistent. This situation led EPA to 
propose regulations to clarify a 
generator’s category for a calendar 
month during which it generates any 
combination of non-acute hazardous 
waste, acute hazardous waste, and 
residues from the cleanup of a spill of 
acute hazardous waste. 
EPA discussed its history of 
statements on this topic in the proposed 
rule at 80 FR 57927, noting examples of 
contradictory EPA statements that a 
generator can have just one category per 
calendar month and EPA statements 
that a generator can manage acute 
hazardous waste as one category of 
generator and non-acute hazardous 
waste as a different category of generator 
in the same calendar month. 
EPA proposed a more practical 
approach that a generator can be in only 
one generator category in a calendar 
month and noted that many EPA 
Regions and states have taken this same 
approach in implementing the RCRA 
hazardous waste program. 
2. What is EPA finalizing? 
EPA is finalizing definitions of the 
generator categories that expressly state 
which generator category would apply 
to hazardous waste generators that 
generate a combination of non-acute 
hazardous waste, acute hazardous 
waste, and/or residues from the cleanup 
of spills of acute hazardous waste in a 
calendar month as discussed earlier in 
this section of the preamble. 
In conjunction with these changes, 
EPA is finalizing a new section § 262.13 
explaining how a generator determines 
its applicable generator category. This 
topic is fully discussed in section IX.C 
of this preamble. 
EPA’s decision to finalize this 
approach is based partially on 
developing a practical solution to 
situations where a generator generates, 
for example, acute and non-acute 
hazardous waste in the same month. 
This approach is analogous to situations 
in which a generator that generates only 
non-acute hazardous wastes counts its 
various hazardous wastes. In those 
situations, a generator must consider the 
total amount of all its different kinds of 
non-acute hazardous waste, not the 
amount of each type of hazardous waste 
(e.g., type of waste identified by 
individual EPA hazardous waste 
number) separately. Therefore, a 
generator must similarly follow the 
same logic in considering the 
combination of acute hazardous wastes, 
non-acute hazardous wastes, and 
residues from the cleanup of a spill of 
acute hazardous waste generated in a 
calendar month when determining 
which category a generator belongs to. 
We note that many EPA Regions and 
states have taken this same approach in 
implementing the RCRA hazardous 
waste program and many of the state 
agencies that commented on the 
proposed rule stated they were in 
support of these changes to the 
regulations for the reasons EPA 
described in the preamble to the 
proposed rule, particularly because of 
the inconsistencies in the guidance. 
In practice, five waste generation 
scenarios exist with different 
combinations of acute hazardous waste, 
non-acute hazardous waste, and 
residues from the cleanup of spills of 
acute hazardous waste generated in a 
calendar month. These scenarios are 
summarized in Table 6—Generator 
Categories Based on Quantity of Waste 
Generated.
15 
VerDate Sep<11>2014 20:32 Nov 25, 2016 Jkt 241001 PO 00000 Frm 00012 Fmt 4701 Sfmt 4700 E:\FR\FM\28NOR3.SGM 28NOR3mstockstill on DSK3G9T082PROD with RULES3
--- page 4 ---
85743 Federal Register / Vol. 81, No. 228 / Monday, November 28, 2016 / Rules and Regulations 
16 Amount of hazardous waste accumulated on 
site at any given time can also impact what 
regulations the SQG must comply with. 
17 SQGs can also accumulate hazardous waste for 
up to 270 days if they ship the hazardous waste 
greater than 200 miles. 
18 ‘‘Academic Labs Rule’’; 73 FR 72912, December 
1, 2008. 
TABLE 6—G ENERATOR CATEGORIES BASED ON QUANTITY OF WASTE GENERATED 
Quantity of acute 
hazardous waste 
generated in a 
calendar month 
Quantity of non-acute 
hazardous waste 
generated in a 
calendar month 
Quantity of residues from the cleanup of 
spilled acute 
hazardous waste 
generated in a 
calendar month 
Generator 
category 
> 1 kg ........................................................ Any amount .............................................. Any amoun t .............................................. LQG. 
Any amount ............................................... ≥ 1,000 kg ................................................ Any amount .............................................. LQG. 
Any amount ............................................... Any amount .............................................. > 100 kg ...... ............................................. LQG. 
≤ 1 kg ........................................................ > 100 kg and < 1,000 kg ......................... ≤ 100 kg ................................................... SQG. 
≤ 1 kg ........................................................ ≤ 100 kg ................................................... ≤ 100 kg ................................................... VSQG. 
Note: When calculating generator categories, the quantities of acute hazardous waste and non-acute hazardous waste are considered 
separately. 
In three of the five possible scenarios, 
the generator is an LQG; in one scenario, 
the generator is an SQG; and in one 
scenario, the generator is a VSQG. 
As the table indicates, in the first 
three scenarios, the generator is an LQG 
if it generates any of the following in a 
calendar month: More than 1 kilogram 
of acute hazardous waste, 1,000 
kilograms or more of non-acute 
hazardous waste, or more than 100 
kilograms of residues from the cleanup 
of a spill of acute hazardous waste. This 
is true regardless of the amount of waste 
generated in the other categories. This 
fact is made clear in the final regulatory 
definition of ‘‘LQG’’ by stating that a 
generator is an LQG if it generates ‘‘any’’ 
of the types of hazardous waste in the 
amounts listed and by using of the word 
‘‘or’’ between (1), (2), and (3). 
As an LQG, the generator must 
comply with the independent 
requirements for LQGs (specified in 
§ 262.10) and the conditions for 
exemption for LQGs (specified in 
§ 262.17), as well as any applicable 
conditions for exemption for SAAs at 
§ 262.15. 
In the fourth scenario, the generator is 
an SQG if, in a calendar month, it 
generates greater than 100 kilograms 
and less than 1,000 kilograms of non- 
acute hazardous waste and also 1 
kilogram or less of acute hazardous 
waste and 100 kilograms or less of 
residues from the cleanup of a spill of 
acute hazardous waste.
16 The final 
regulatory text expresses this scenario 
by using the word ‘‘and’’ between (1), 
(2), and (3) in the definition of SQG. 
As an SQG, the generator must 
comply with the independent 
requirements for SQGs (specified in 
§ 262.10) and the conditions for the 
exemption for SQGs (specified in 
§ 262.16), as well as any applicable 
conditions for exemption for SAAs at 
§ 262.15. 
Finally, in the fifth scenario, if a 
generator generates 1 kilogram or less of 
acute hazardous waste and 100 
kilograms or less of non-acute 
hazardous waste and 100 kilograms or 
less of residue from the cleanup of a 
spill of acute hazardous waste, then the 
generator is a VSQG for that calendar 
month. The regulatory text expresses 
this scenario by using the word ‘‘and’’ 
between (1), (2), and (3) in the 
definition. 
As a VSQG, the generator must 
comply with the independent 
requirements for VSQGs (specified in 
§ 262.10) and the conditions for 
exemption for VSQGs (specified in 
§ 262.14). 
3. What changed since proposal? 
EPA is finalizing the definitions for 
the generator categories as proposed and 
has not made revisions to how it expects 
generators to determine their generator 
category when they generate acute and 
non-acute hazardous waste. 
4. Major Comments 
Some commenters who opposed 
EPA’s proposal that a generator should 
manage all its waste under the same 
generator category argued this would be 
a change to how they are currently 
operating and that it is burdensome to 
operate a whole generator site as an 
LQG because of the existence of LQG 
levels of acute hazardous waste. 
EPA recognizes commenters’ concerns 
about disruption to, and burdens on, 
current operations. However, EPA has 
determined that if the definitions of the 
generator categories are going to depend 
on the amounts of hazardous waste 
generated, it does not, in the end, make 
practical sense to have a generator that 
is operating in more than one category. 
EPA notes that some comments stated 
that there will be a difference for those 
generators that have been managing 
acute hazardous waste in a separate area 
and only having a RCRA contingency 
plan for that area, but believes that those 
generators are LQGs and should be 
following the independent requirements 
and conditions for exemption for LQGs 
for all waste areas. Again, many states 
and EPA Regions commented that they 
are already interpreting the regulations 
in this way so EPA does not anticipate 
that these changes will have a major 
effect in program implementation. In 
fact, these revisions are making the 
regulations consistent with how most 
programs are operating currently. 
Effect of the Reorganization: This 
section is not affected by the 
reorganization. 
C. Definition of Central Accumulation 
Area (40 CFR 260.10) 
1. Introduction 
In the proposal at 80 FR 57927, the 
Agency discussed defining the term 
‘‘central accumulation area’’ (CAA) in 
§ 260.10. LQGs may accumulate 
hazardous waste on site without a 
permit or complying with the interim 
status standards for up to 90 days, 
provided they comply with the 
conditions of § 262.17 and SQGs may do 
the same for up to 180 days, provided 
they comply with the conditions of 
§ 262.16.
17 Over the years, stakeholders 
have used different terms to refer to 
these on-site generator accumulation 
areas, including ‘‘generator 
accumulation areas,’’ ‘‘less-than-90-day 
areas,’’ and ‘‘less-than-180-day areas.’’ 
In December 2008, EPA promulgated a 
definition of ‘‘central accumulation 
area’’ in subpart K of part 262 to refer 
to these types of areas.
18 EPA codified 
the term ‘‘central accumulation area’’ for 
the sake of convenience to distinguish 
these types of accumulation areas from 
satellite accumulation areas and 
laboratories, which are both subject to 
different regulations than central 
accumulation areas are in that rule. At 
the time, EPA promulgated the term in 
VerDate Sep<11>2014 20:32 Nov 25, 2016 Jkt 241001 PO 00000 Frm 00013 Fmt 4701 Sfmt 4700 E:\FR\FM\28NOR3.SGM 28NOR3mstockstill on DSK3G9T082PROD with RULES3
--- page 5 ---
85748 Federal Register / Vol. 81, No. 228 / Monday, November 28, 2016 / Rules and Regulations 
21 Section 262.18(c) has been moved as part of the 
reorganization from § 262.12(c). 
22 Hazardous Waste Determination Program 
Evaluation, IEc, April 2013. http://www.epa.gov/
evaluate/pdf/waste/haz-waste-determination.pdf; 
and Summary of Waste Determination Meetings 
with VT and NH State Officials on September 27– 
28, 2010; and ‘‘10 Most Common Hazardous Waste 
(RCRA) Violations in Georgia: 40 CFR 262.11 
‘‘Hazardous Waste Determination,’’ Georgia 
Department of Natural Resources https://
epd.georgia.gov/sites/epd.georgia.gov/files/related_
files/site_page/guidehwdet.pdf. For more citations, 
see the proposed Generator Improvements Rule, 
page 57936–57937, September 25, 2015. 
2. Generators Shall Not Transport to a 
Non-Designated Facility 
a. Introduction. As the Agency has 
stated numerous times in the 
development and implementation of the 
RCRA hazardous waste program, a 
fundamental aspect of the program is 
the responsibility placed on the 
generator of hazardous waste to ensure 
its hazardous waste is properly managed 
from cradle to grave. Numerous existing 
regulatory provisions are designed to 
ensure that generators send their 
hazardous waste only to authorized 
TSDFs or other authorized facilities. See 
for example, §§ 262.18(c),
21 262.20(b), 
262.40(a). However, from experience 
with implementing the program, the 
Agency has found situations where a 
generator failed to send its hazardous 
waste to a facility authorized to receive 
that waste, thus creating both regulatory 
and potential hazardous waste 
mismanagement problems. The Agency 
believes that a statement expressly 
prohibiting a generator from sending 
hazardous waste to a facility not 
authorized to accept it is necessary to 
ensure that generators understand they 
have this obligation. Therefore, the 
Agency proposed adding such a new 
independent requirement at 
§ 262.10(a)(3). 
b. What is EPA finalizing? EPA is 
finalizing this provision as proposed 
and is promulgating § 262.10(a)(3), 
which clearly and explicitly states that 
a generator cannot offer or otherwise 
cause its waste to be sent to a facility 
that is not authorized to accept it. 
This provision is being added to the 
regulatory framework and not replacing 
§§ 262.18(c), 262.20(b), 262.40(a), as 
those provisions are aimed at other 
aspects of the generator program (for 
example, ensuring manifests are 
properly completed). 
EPA received general support from 
most of the commenters on this 
provision, with one commenter stating 
that the provision was unnecessary. 
EPA believes that the provision is 
necessary, as it is a cornerstone of the 
generator program and should be 
explicitly stated in the regulations to 
ensure that all generators are aware of 
it. 
Effect of the Reorganization: This 
section is not affected by the 
reorganization. 
3. Deletion of § 262.10(c) 
a. Introduction. EPA proposed 
deleting and reserving § 262.10(c) of the 
hazardous waste regulations because it 
is outdated, confusing and unnecessary. 
The provision describes the 
requirements for a generator who treats, 
stores, or disposes of hazardous waste 
on site and includes a list of provisions 
these generators must comply with. 
When § 262.10(c) was initially 
promulgated on February 26, 1980, the 
hazardous waste generator regulations 
distinguished between the generators 
that sent hazardous waste to be 
managed off site and those that managed 
their hazardous waste on site. 
Generators that sent hazardous waste off 
site could manage it for 90 days in an 
accumulation area, but generators that 
managed hazardous waste on site were 
expected to manage it under their 
permits or under interim status 
regulations. The purpose of § 262.10(c) 
was to provide the list of requirements 
that generators managing hazardous 
waste were required to follow in 
addition to those permits or interim 
status requirements. 
This distinction meant that the two 
types of generators had very different 
standards for the areas where newly 
generated hazardous waste was 
managed. Significantly, generators 
sending hazardous waste off site could 
easily make physical changes to their 
accumulation areas, whereas a similar 
generator managing hazardous waste on 
site under a permit had to go through 
the permit modification process to make 
the same kind of changes. EPA 
effectively eliminated the distinctions 
by revising these regulations (45 FR 
76624, November 19, 1980 and 47 FR 
1248, January 11, 1982). The final rule 
promulgated in January 11, 1982, made 
a change to § 262.10(c) that added the 
generator accumulation provisions at 
§ 262.34 to the list of provisions that 
apply to a generator that treats, stores, 
or disposes of hazardous waste on site. 
Currently, the Agency does not make 
this distinction between generators that 
send waste for treatment off site and 
those that manage waste on site. This 
revision is therefore outdated and, thus, 
should be deleted and reserved. 
b. What is EPA finalizing? EPA 
received general support from most 
commenters who addressed this issue 
and is finalizing the deletion of the 
paragraph. Section 262.10(c) will be 
reserved to avoid reusing that specific 
paragraph. 
Effect of the Reorganization: This 
deletion is not affected by the 
reorganization. 
4. Deletion of Reference to Laboratory 
XL Project Regulations (40 CFR 262.10(j) 
and Part 262 Subpart J) 
The Laboratory XL Project was 
created for Boston College, the 
University of Massachusetts, and the 
University of Vermont, and was 
finalized in the Federal Register on 
September 28, 1999 (64 FR 53292). 
Originally, the program was to expire on 
September 30, 2003. But on June 21, 
2006, EPA extended the program and 
the new expiration date was changed to 
April 15, 2009 (71 FR 35550). Since the 
program has now expired, EPA is 
deleting paragraph (j) from § 262.10, as 
well as part 262 subpart J and reserving 
them. 
Effect of the Reorganization: This 
deletion is not affected by the 
reorganization. 
B. Waste Determinations (40 CFR 
262.11) 
1. Introduction 
Under RCRA, generators are the first 
critical link in ensuring safe 
management of hazardous waste. They 
are the cradle in the cradle-to-grave 
RCRA system. The first and most 
important step in the regulations is for 
generators of solid waste (as defined at 
§ 261.2) to determine whether their 
waste is also a hazardous waste by using 
§ 262.11. If a generator fails to identify 
a hazardous waste as hazardous, it will 
not start the waste down the hazardous 
waste management path and the critical 
gateway to the RCRA Subtitle C safe 
management system will be missed. 
Such mismanagement of hazardous 
waste may result in damage to human 
health and/or the environment. 
Thus, the success of the hazardous 
waste regulatory program depends, to a 
great extent, on generators making 
accurate hazardous waste 
determinations. However, as described 
in the proposal, EPA has observed 
through various efforts that generators 
struggle with this crucial first step with 
the estimated rates of non-compliance 
ranging from 20 to 30 percent.
22 With an 
estimated generator universe in the 
hundreds of thousands, the potential for 
the mismanagement of hazardous waste 
and the impact on public health and the 
environment is significant. Therefore, 
given the importance of this regulatory 
provision, the Agency proposed several 
changes to the waste determination 
regulations at § 262.11 in an effort to 
clarify them, and thereby foster 
VerDate Sep<11>2014 20:32 Nov 25, 2016 Jkt 241001 PO 00000 Frm 00018 Fmt 4701 Sfmt 4700 E:\FR\FM\28NOR3.SGM 28NOR3mstockstill on DSK3G9T082PROD with RULES3
--- page 6 ---
85749 Federal Register / Vol. 81, No. 228 / Monday, November 28, 2016 / Rules and Regulations 
23 Comment by individual consumer. Docket 
number: EPA–HQ–RCRA–2012–0121–0160 
improved compliance by generators. 
These proposed changes were intended 
primarily to codify Agency 
interpretations that have been 
developed and implemented over the 
last 35 years in Federal Register notices, 
policy, letters, and other guidance. 
Specifically, the proposed rule 
included revisions to the § 262.11 
regulations that would (1) clarify that 
hazardous waste determinations must 
be accurate; (2) confirm that a 
generator’s waste must be classified at 
its point of generation and, for wastes 
potentially exhibiting a hazardous 
characteristic, at any time during the 
course of its management when the 
properties of the wastes may change in 
such a way as to change the hazardous 
waste determination; (3) revise the 
language on how to make a 
determination for listed hazardous 
waste in § 262.11 to explain more fully 
how generators can make this kind of 
determination using generator 
knowledge; (4) explain more completely 
in the regulations at § 262.11 how a 
generator should evaluate its waste to 
determine whether the waste may 
exhibit one of the hazardous 
characteristics; (5) move the 
independent recordkeeping and 
retention requirements for hazardous 
waste determinations currently found at 
§ 262.40(c) into § 262.11 to integrate this 
provision more directly into the 
hazardous waste determination 
regulations; (6) revise the hazardous 
waste determination recordkeeping 
regulations to require that SQGs and 
LQGs maintain records of any test 
results, waste analyses, or other 
determinations made in accordance 
with § 262.11 for at least three years, 
including waste determinations where a 
solid waste (as defined in § 261.2) is 
found not to be a RCRA hazardous 
waste (as defined in § 261.3); (7) revise 
the hazardous waste determination 
regulations by copying § 262.40(d) into 
§ 262.11 to address situations where an 
enforcement action has been initiated 
and the period of record retention (e.g., 
three years from when the record was 
generated) must be extended 
automatically during the course of any 
unresolved enforcement action 
regarding the regulated activity or as 
requested by the Administrator, and (8) 
require generators identify all applicable 
EPA hazardous waste numbers (EPA 
hazardous waste codes) in subparts C 
and D of part 261 if the solid waste is 
determined to be a hazardous waste. 
The Agency also requested comment 
regarding how best to emphasize the 
importance of accurate hazardous waste 
determinations and the length of time 
records must be maintained. Finally, 
EPA also asked for comment on the 
utility of developing an electronic 
decision making tool for hazardous 
waste determinations. 
2. What is EPA finalizing? 
The Agency is finalizing the following 
changes to § 262.11: 
(1) Requiring that a solid and 
hazardous waste determination must be 
accurate, and expanding on why this 
determination is important; i.e., to 
ensure the proper management of the 
waste within the RCRA framework; 
(2) Requiring that a hazardous waste 
determination for each solid waste must 
be made at the point of waste 
generation, before any dilution, mixing, 
or other alteration of the waste occurs, 
and at any time in the course of its 
management that it has, or may have, 
changed its properties as a result of 
exposure to the environment or other 
factors such that its waste classification 
may have changed; 
(3) Incorporating regulatory language 
that elaborates on how to make a 
hazardous waste determination for 
listed and characteristic hazardous 
waste; 
(4) Referencing the applicable RCRA 
regulations for identifying possible 
exclusions or exemptions for the 
hazardous waste at in § 262.11(e). 
(5) Moving the independent 
recordkeeping and retention 
requirements for hazardous waste 
determinations currently found at 
§ 262.40(c) into § 262.11(f), with 
clarifications on what records must be 
kept; and 
(6) Requiring SQGs and LQGs to 
identify the applicable RCRA waste 
codes for the hazardous waste they have 
generated, but clarifying that such 
identification must occur no later than 
immediately prior to shipping 
hazardous waste off site to a RCRA 
permitted treatment, storage and 
disposal facility in accordance with the 
requirements of § 262.32. 
The Agency is not finalizing the 
proposed requirement that SQGs and 
LQGs maintain records of their non- 
hazardous waste determinations. Nor is 
the EPA finalizing a requirement for 
SQGs and LQGs to maintain records of 
their hazardous waste determinations 
until the generator closes its site. 
Finally, EPA requested feedback 
regarding the feasibility and 
effectiveness of developing electronic 
decision-making tools for hazardous 
waste determinations and whether such 
tools would be a helpful to generators. 
Based on comments, the Agency is not 
finalizing any provision related to 
electronic decision-making tools for 
hazardous waste determinations but 
will continue to explore feasibility in 
the future. The Agency took comment 
on a number of electronic tools and 
reporting options and has organized our 
discussions of all of these options in 
section XIII of this preamble. See this 
section for a more in-depth discussion 
regarding electronic waste 
determination decision tools and other 
electronic options. 
a. Solid and hazardous waste 
determinations must be accurate. The 
Agency is finalizing the proposed 
requirement for generators to make 
accurate hazardous waste 
determinations. However, we are also 
modifying the proposed regulatory text 
in response to comments to provide a 
rationale for this change by stating that 
the accurate determination is in order to 
ensure wastes are properly managed 
under RCRA. Accurate hazardous waste 
determinations are necessary to ensure 
the proper management of waste within 
the RCRA framework; in doing so, 
environmental protection will be 
enhanced and greater generator 
accountability fostered. 
EPA believes that waste 
determinations are of utmost 
importance and warrant this emphasis 
regarding accuracy. As one commenter 
stated, ‘‘Accurate waste determinations 
are required to ensure that each waste 
stream generated by a company is 
properly managed. Additionally, 
accurate waste determinations protect 
workers by making the company and the 
worker(s) aware of the dangers of the 
waste(s) being managed. Further, 
accurate waste determinations will 
ultimately lead to an accurate generator 
status determination.’’
23 
Some commenters argued that 
addition of the term ‘‘accurate’’ to the 
regulation would be superfluous, as the 
Agency’s intent that hazardous waste 
determinations be accurate is self- 
evident, and that adding this term may 
even imply that other aspects of the 
RCRA program need not be accurately 
implemented. The Agency’s intent is 
that all parts of the RCRA regulatory 
program be implemented in the manner 
required by the regulations. In adding 
the term ‘‘accurate’’ to the waste 
determination requirement of § 262.11, 
the Agency intends to emphasize the 
importance of this step in the waste 
management process. Inaccurate 
hazardous waste determinations will 
lead to violation of other RCRA 
regulatory requirements and 
mismanagement of the waste, which 
may result in damage to human health 
or the environment. 
VerDate Sep<11>2014 20:32 Nov 25, 2016 Jkt 241001 PO 00000 Frm 00019 Fmt 4701 Sfmt 4700 E:\FR\FM\28NOR3.SGM 28NOR3mstockstill on DSK3G9T082PROD with RULES3
--- page 7 ---
85750 Federal Register / Vol. 81, No. 228 / Monday, November 28, 2016 / Rules and Regulations 
24 See 45 FR 33095–96, May 19, 1980 and 55 FR 
11830, March 29, 1990. 
25 See ‘‘Regulatory Impact Assessment of the 
Potential Costs, Benefits, and Other Impacts of the 
Final Hazardous Waste Generator Improvements 
Rule.’’ A copy of the analysis is available in the 
docket for this action. 
26 Hazardous Waste Determination Program 
Evaluation, IEc, April 2013. http://www.epa.gov/
evaluate/pdf/waste/haz-waste-determination.pdf. 
27 Note: If the waste is listed, a generator may file 
a delisting petition under 40 CFR 260.20 and 260.22 
to EPA or the authorized state to demonstrate that 
the waste from this particular site or operation is 
not a hazardous waste. 
Another reason for including the 
language explaining a generator must 
make an accurate waste determination 
to ensure the wastes are properly 
managed is to clarify the applicability of 
§ 262.11 in instances in which 
generators choose to manage their non- 
hazardous wastes as hazardous wastes. 
Even if the waste may not be hazardous, 
‘‘over managing’’ the waste is acceptable 
and meets the requirements in § 262.11 
because the generator has made a 
determination intended to ensure, 
beyond a doubt, proper and protective 
management of the waste within the 
RCRA regulatory program. The practice 
of over-managing non-hazardous waste 
as hazardous waste has been in 
existence for years and EPA’s final 
language in § 262.11 continues to allow 
this practice. 
In addition to concerns about the 
regulatory status of over-classified 
wastes, commenters also expressed 
concerns about generators using the best 
available information and still making 
an inaccurate determination because of 
the errors and omissions of others. 
Generators are, and always have been, 
ultimately responsible for making 
accurate hazardous waste 
determinations. Hiring a third party 
contractor, waste broker, or consultant, 
or reliance on information provided by 
suppliers does not transfer this 
responsibility to those third parties. 
While the Agency understands that 
reliance on third parties may sometimes 
result in an inaccurate waste 
determination, the responsibility 
remains with the generator. It would be 
prudent for the generators to practice 
due diligence and establish processes 
and procedures that ask questions of 
their suppliers and waste management 
companies to understand why their 
materials are hazardous or not. 
One commenter mentioned that the 
term ‘accurate’ also does not provide 
any guidance about how intensive or 
deep a generator’s research must be to 
meet the intended standard. This 
commenter goes on to discuss that a 
five-minute review of a Safety Data 
Sheet (SDS) and product brochure may 
well be ‘accurate’ but much too 
superficial to ensure the generator has 
considered all potentially hazardous 
attributes of the waste. The Agency 
disagrees with this commenter. Waste 
determinations are site specific and 
each generator must evaluate the 
amount of time and effort needed to 
make an accurate waste determination. 
In some cases, a review of an SDS may 
suffice because the identification of the 
constituents and their concentration 
ranges may make it clear whether the 
chemical is or is not a hazardous waste 
upon disposal. Conversely, the Agency 
can see a number of situations where a 
generator must conduct analysis and 
testing to meet this requirement. 
Regardless of the effort invested in 
making a hazardous waste 
determination, the Agency’s intent is 
that the results of the determination be 
accurate and bring about the proper 
management of the waste under the 
RCRA regulatory framework. 
b. A hazardous waste determination 
must be made at the point of generation 
before any dilution, mixing, or other 
alteration of the waste occurs. As 
described in the proposed rule, the 
Agency’s policy and position from the 
beginning of the RCRA program has 
been that a waste determination must be 
made at the point of generation (i.e., the 
point at which the material first 
becomes a solid waste under RCRA; See, 
for example, 55 FR 11830, March 29, 
1990). This includes both the time and 
place the waste was first generated. By 
requiring that the hazardous waste 
determination be made at the point of 
generation in § 262.11(a), the final 
regulation clarifies that the 
determination cannot be made 
downstream in the process, where other 
materials could be mixed with the waste 
or where the waste may have changed 
its physical or chemical characteristics. 
A generator’s hazardous waste 
determination at the initial point of 
generation is critical to ensure proper 
management of the waste not only by 
the generator, but also by transporters 
and TSDFs who rely on the generator’s 
determination to allow them to safely 
manage the waste and provide 
appropriate treatment and disposal. 
This proposed revision to § 262.11 is not 
a substantive change to the program; 
preambles to a number of previous rules 
explain that EPA has always maintained 
that hazardous waste determinations 
must be made at the initial point of 
generation.
24 The Agency is finalizing 
this requirement as proposed. 
Many commenters expressed concern 
with EPA’s proposed requirement that 
hazardous waste determinations must 
be made at the point of generation. For 
many generators, the Agency believes 
making a hazardous waste 
determination on new wastes should be 
an infrequent evaluation. An analysis of 
2013 biennial report data identified 46 
percent of LQGs generated between one 
and five waste streams. Similarly, this 
same analysis found that overall LQGs 
generated a median of 6 hazardous 
waste streams and a mean of 13 
hazardous waste streams.
25 Many of 
these generators continue to generate 
the same wastes over long time periods, 
and absent changes in the waste, the 
generator may continue to rely on an 
initial determination of the waste’s 
RCRA status (particularly for listed 
hazardous wastes). Of course, should a 
generator in this scenario change either 
its production feedstocks or production 
process, or know of any other factors 
that may result in changes to the waste’s 
origin or properties, the generator may 
have a new waste requiring a new waste 
determination. 
Based on EPA’s 2013 Hazardous 
Waste Determination Program 
Evaluation
26 and stakeholder 
discussions, the Agency has determined 
that most generators make a hazardous 
waste determination by using 
knowledge of their processes, including 
feedstocks and possible side reactions, 
and other materials used at the facility 
to evaluate whether waste is hazardous 
or not. In order to properly classify and 
manage waste, generators must make a 
hazardous waste determination when 
the waste is first generated. Most 
generators should have sufficient 
knowledge of their waste to determine 
whether the waste is hazardous and 
why it is hazardous i.e., whether the 
waste meets one of the listing 
descriptions in subpart D of part 261
27 
or whether the waste may exhibit one or 
more hazardous waste characteristics 
described in subpart C of part 261, and 
to manage the hazardous waste 
according to its hazards, under RCRA. 
When generator knowledge is 
inconclusive or uncertain, testing may 
be appropriate. 
We have and continue to recognize 
that situations will occur where a 
generator is not able to make an accurate 
waste determination based on 
knowledge alone, and the generator will 
need to send a representative sample of 
the waste to be tested. However, as the 
EPA has stated in the past, the generator 
must manage the waste as hazardous 
waste until the results of the test are 
received, and continue to manage it as 
VerDate Sep<11>2014 20:32 Nov 25, 2016 Jkt 241001 PO 00000 Frm 00020 Fmt 4701 Sfmt 4700 E:\FR\FM\28NOR3.SGM 28NOR3mstockstill on DSK3G9T082PROD with RULES3
--- page 8 ---
85755 Federal Register / Vol. 81, No. 228 / Monday, November 28, 2016 / Rules and Regulations 
32 RCRA 3001(d). 
evaluating whether the solid waste they 
have generated is a hazardous waste. 
C. Determining Generator Category (40 
CFR 262.13) 
A generator must correctly count the 
quantity of hazardous waste that it 
generates in order to determine its 
generator category. During the 
development of the proposed rule, EPA 
determined that the extent of the 
counting requirements in the generator 
regulations at the time consisted of lists 
in § 261.5(c)–(d) and (h)–(j) of what 
materials must and must not be 
included when counting waste. These 
regulations did not address other 
counting considerations. EPA therefore 
proposed a new § 262.13 to describe 
how a generator determines its generator 
category, containing the previously 
existing language in § 261.5(c)–(d) as 
well as some specific steps to calculate 
an amount that includes the correct 
amounts of hazardous waste. 
Elsewhere in the proposed rule, EPA 
proposed regulatory language for each of 
the categories of generators describing 
how the rules regarding mixing from 
§ 261.5(h)–(j) would impact their 
generator categories and how to count 
mixtures of hazardous waste and solid 
waste. EPA is consolidating the 
discussion of counting hazardous waste 
from all these areas of the proposed rule 
into § 262.13 for the final rule in order 
to make these requirements easily 
understandable by the regulated 
community and thus improve 
compliance and consistency. 
1. Counting Hazardous Waste 
a. Introduction. The purpose of 
proposed § 262.13 was to lay out the 
framework for making a generator 
category determination in paragraph (a) 
and to stress that the generator’s 
category can change from month to 
month. The proposed regulation set 
forth procedures to determine whether a 
generator is a VSQG, an SQG, or an LQG 
for a particular month, as defined in 
§ 260.10. As EPA discussed in the 
proposed rule, the regulations in 
§ 262.13 do not constitute a new 
requirement for generators, but in the 
regulations up to this point, the 
counting requirements have not been 
presented in a clear and succinct 
manner. 
b. What is EPA finalizing? EPA is 
finalizing a new § 262.13 to address how 
to make a generator category 
determination. It includes the language 
discussed in this section on counting as 
well as the mixing requirements 
discussed later in this chapter of the 
preamble. The addition of the 
definitions of generator categories to 
§ 260.10 and this paragraph on how to 
make a generator category determination 
provide specific instructions on this 
matter for the regulated community and 
thereby improve compliance with the 
generator regulations. 
The introductory language of § 262.13 
states that a generator must determine 
its generator category and that the 
category is based on the amount of 
hazardous waste that is generated in a 
calendar month. This requirement for a 
generator category to be based on a 
monthly generation amount is derived 
from the RCRA statute and is critical to 
the framework of the generator 
regulations.
32 The regulations also state 
that a generator’s category can change 
from month to month. Although many 
generators change categories several 
times a year, depending on various 
factors such as inputs, demand, 
processing volume, and production, 
EPA knows many generators choose to 
operate as LQGs all the time to simplify 
their regulatory compliance. EPA 
encourages this practice, but notes in 
the regulations that actual generator 
category can change month to month. 
In addition, EPA notes that a VSQG or 
an SQG that generates more hazardous 
waste in a particular calendar month 
than allowed in its generator category 
must make a determination that it now 
meets the higher generator category (if it 
is not covered by the episodic 
generation provisions discussed in 
section X of this preamble). 
Paragraph (a) of § 262.13 presents 
basic procedures for counting hazardous 
waste generated in the calendar month, 
subtracting or excluding anything that is 
exempt and using the difference to 
determine the generator category. 
Paragraph (b) of § 262.13 specifically 
addresses the situation in which a 
generator generates any combination of 
non-acute hazardous waste, acute 
hazardous waste, and the residues from 
the cleanup of a spill of acute hazardous 
waste. This paragraph presents a series 
of steps for a generator to follow when 
determining its generator category to 
ensure it selects the appropriate 
category for the total amount and types 
of hazardous waste generated. 
Sections 262.13(c) and (d) are existing 
provisions that EPA is moving from 
§ 261.5(c) and (d) of the existing 
regulations with a few small wording 
changes to reinforce that category 
determinations are made monthly and 
do not otherwise represent a change in 
the generator regulations. 
Section 262.13(e) completes the main 
process of counting by stating that based 
on the generator category that is 
determined under the steps laid out in 
the section, the generator should 
determine which of the sets of generator 
provisions apply to it. 
c. What changed since proposal? EPA 
made several changes to § 262.13(a)–(e) 
in response to the comments received 
on the proposed rule. First, several 
commenters pointed out that this 
section tailors its procedures for 
generators that generator acute and non- 
acute hazardous waste in the same 
month, but does not directly address 
generators that generator only acute 
hazardous waste or non-acute hazardous 
waste. EPA agrees with this comment 
and, therefore, converted the proposed 
paragraph (a) to introductory language 
for the section and made a new 
§ 262.13(a) that addresses those 
generators that generate only acute or 
non-acute hazardous waste. This section 
includes a simplified version of the 
same procedures in paragraph (b) for 
those without both types of hazardous 
waste. 
Commenters also noted that although 
EPA included a Table 1 to § 262.13 in 
the regulations, the table was not 
referenced in the regulations. EPA 
therefore added references to Table 1 in 
the regulatory text in paragraphs (a) and 
(b). Also, in Table 1 in this section, we 
are deleting the first column of numbers 
that denoted which generation scenario 
was being represented by each row. This 
column was potentially useful in the 
preamble discussion, but served no 
purpose in the regulations and has been 
removed. 
In addition, several commenters 
stated that although a generator’s 
category is based on the amount of 
hazardous waste it generates in a 
calendar month, every generator need 
not make an exact category 
determination every month. The 
commenters argued that many 
generators have a very accurate sense of 
what category they are month-to-month 
because their processes generate 
consistent amounts of hazardous waste 
over time. Only those generators with 
generation amounts near the limit 
would have to count regularly to make 
the category determination. These 
commenters stated that many generators 
with categories that fluctuate from 
month-to-month choose to operate as 
LQGs full time and would, therefore, 
not need to count every month to 
determine generator category. 
EPA agrees with the commenters and 
therefore has made revisions to the 
introductory language for the section to 
state that a generator is required to 
determine its generator category. The 
language continues to stress that a 
category is based on monthly generation 
VerDate Sep<11>2014 20:32 Nov 25, 2016 Jkt 241001 PO 00000 Frm 00025 Fmt 4701 Sfmt 4700 E:\FR\FM\28NOR3.SGM 28NOR3mstockstill on DSK3G9T082PROD with RULES3
--- page 9 ---
85756 Federal Register / Vol. 81, No. 228 / Monday, November 28, 2016 / Rules and Regulations 
33 Also see EPA document, Land Disposal 
Restrictions: Summary of Requirements, U.S. EPA 
Office of Solid Waste and Emergency Response and 
Office of Enforcement and Compliance Assurance, 
EPA–530–R–01–007, Revised August 2001. 
and may change from month to month, 
but generators are not required to follow 
the included steps every month. EPA 
notes, however, that an LQG must keep 
track of its amounts of hazardous waste 
for the purpose of completing the 
Biennial Report, when applicable. 
Finally, EPA added the language in 
§ 262.13(e) upon determining that 
although the purpose of the section is to 
lead the generator through counting its 
hazardous waste for the purpose of 
determining the correct generator 
category, the proposed regulations did 
not include the final step in the process. 
Effect of the Reorganization: This 
section is partially affected by the 
reorganization. Some of the language in 
§ 262.13 on what materials to count 
when determining generator category 
moved from previous § 261.5, but much 
of this regulation is new text. Section VI 
of this preamble discusses the 
reorganization. 
2. Mixtures of Non-Hazardous Waste 
and Hazardous Waste 
a. Introduction. In an effort to explain 
how mixtures of non-hazardous waste 
(solid waste) and hazardous waste affect 
generator category determinations, the 
Agency proposed a series of 
modifications in §§ 262.14, 262.16 and 
262.17 for VSQGs, SQGs and LQGs, 
respectively. The proposed rule also 
discussed how SQGs and LQGs are 
subject to the mixture rules in § 261.3. 
As explained in the preamble to the 
proposed rule on page 57928, this 
clarification was also designed to clarify 
the language that was found at 
§§ 261.5(h) and (i) which addressed the 
mixing of hazardous waste and non- 
hazardous waste by a VSQG and the 
implications to its generator category if 
the mixture is determined to be a 
hazardous waste. The language 
specifically addressed how the 
regulations apply when VSQG 
hazardous waste is mixed with non- 
hazardous solid waste and the resulting 
combination exceeds the VSQG quantity 
limits. 
b. What is EPA finalizing? The 
Agency is finalizing the regulations 
applicable to generators mixing 
hazardous waste with solid waste as 
follows: 
1. Moving the proposed relevant 
provisions of §§ 262.14(b), 262.16(d) 
and 262.17(f) applicable to mixtures of 
hazardous waste and solid waste to 
§ 262.13(f). The act of mixing a solid 
waste and a hazardous waste is not the 
same as a generator accumulating 
hazardous waste, nor is the act of 
mixing in any way related to the 
conditions for exemption from 
permitting. The purpose of moving the 
requirements for mixtures to § 262.13 is 
to make generators aware of the 
regulations applicable to mixtures of 
hazardous waste and solid waste, and to 
accurately explain how the mixing of a 
hazardous waste with a solid waste may 
affect a generator’s category 
determination for the calendar month. 
2. Clarifying that a VSQG mixing 
hazardous waste with solid waste can 
remain subject to § 262.14, even though 
the mixture may exceed the VSQG 
quantity limits (either 100 kg per month 
generated or 1,000 kg accumulated on 
site at any one time) unless the mixture 
exhibits one or more of the 
characteristics of a hazardous waste. If 
the resultant mixture exhibits a 
hazardous waste characteristic, the 
VSQG must add the quantity from the 
resulting mixture with any other 
regulated hazardous waste generated in 
the calendar month and determine 
whether the total quantity generated 
exceeds the generator calendar month 
quantity identified in the definition of 
generator categories found in 40 CFR 
260.10. 
3. For both SQGs and LQGs: 
a. Reemphasizing that both the 
hazardous waste portion of the resulting 
mixture and other amounts of hazardous 
waste generated in a calendar month 
must be counted towards a generator’s 
category determination. 
b. Making SQGs and LQGs aware of 
the § 268.3(a) prohibition of 
impermissible dilution of a hazardous 
waste with a solid waste to 
decharacterize the hazardous waste. The 
regulation at 40 CFR 268.3(a) states, 
‘‘. . . no generator, transporter, handler, 
or owner or operator of a treatment, 
storage, or disposal facility shall in any 
way dilute a restricted waste or the 
residual from treatment of a restricted 
waste as a substitute for adequate 
treatment to achieve compliance 
(emphasis added) with Subpart D of this 
part . . .’’ In particular, if a solid waste 
is mixed with a characteristic hazardous 
waste, the solid waste must provide a 
useful and effective contribution to de- 
characterizing the hazardous waste (i.e. 
possess a unique property to remove the 
hazardous characteristic from the 
hazardous waste instead of merely 
diluting it). 
c. Stating that SQGs and LQGs are 
subject to the regulations applicable to 
mixtures found in § 261.3(a)(2)(iv), 
(b)(2) and (3), and (g)(2)(i). 
d. Stating that SQGs or LQGs that mix 
a characteristic hazardous waste with a 
solid waste to remove any hazardous 
characteristics are subject to the 
treatment standards found at § 268.40, 
as well as the ‘‘impermissible dilution’’ 
requirements in § 268.3.
33 
4. For all generators, reminding them 
they must make a hazardous waste 
determination at § 262.11 when mixing 
a hazardous waste with a solid waste. 
c. What changed since proposal? As 
discussed previously, the Agency made 
a significant number of clarifying 
changes in the final rule for this 
provision based on review and 
evaluation of comments. These include 
the following: Moving the relevant 
proposed provisions of §§ 262.14, 
262.16 and 262.17 applicable to 
mixtures of hazardous waste and solid 
waste to § 262.13 (f); stating that SQGs 
and LQGs are subject to the mixture rule 
found in §§ 261.3(a)(2)(iv), (b)(2) and 
(3), and (g)(2)(i); stating that SQGs and 
LQGs must comply with § 268.3(a), 
which prohibit’s impermissible dilution 
to avoid regulation; for all generators, 
stating that both the hazardous waste 
portion generated from mixing and the 
hazardous waste generated in a calendar 
month must be counted for establishing 
the generator category for that month; 
and stating that all generators must 
make a hazardous waste determination 
for their mixed waste. 
d. Major comments. Many 
commenters supported the proposed 
changes to include the application of 
the mixture rules in a generator’s 
regulatory category determination. 
Others, however, requested greater 
clarity and specificity regarding these 
regulatory provisions. They asked for an 
explanation of the parameters allowed 
when mixing a solid waste and a 
hazardous waste. They also asked for 
clarification about when an SQG or LQG 
that mixes a characteristic hazardous 
waste with a solid waste and generates 
a mixture that no longer exhibits the 
hazardous characteristic must also meet 
the treatment standards found at 
§ 268.40, and a clarification that a 
hazardous waste determination is also 
required for wastes resulting from 
mixing of solid waste and hazardous 
waste. EPA made adjustments to 
§ 262.13(f) in response to these 
comments where appropriate. 
One commenter pointed out that the 
applicable regulations for mixtures are 
unrelated to the conditions for an 
exemption from operating without a 
permit and therefore, the requirements 
applicable to mixtures do not belong 
under §§ 262.14, 262.16, and 262.17. 
The Agency agrees these are valid 
VerDate Sep<11>2014 20:32 Nov 25, 2016 Jkt 241001 PO 00000 Frm 00026 Fmt 4701 Sfmt 4700 E:\FR\FM\28NOR3.SGM 28NOR3mstockstill on DSK3G9T082PROD with RULES3
--- page 10 ---
85757 Federal Register / Vol. 81, No. 228 / Monday, November 28, 2016 / Rules and Regulations 
34 Missouri Department of Natural Resources, 
EPA–HQ–RCRA–2012–0121–0223. 
comments and has incorporated these 
changes as already described. 
Effect of the Reorganization: This 
section is affected by the reorganization. 
The mixing provisions for VSQGs that 
are now found in § 262.13 were 
previously located in § 261.5(i) and (h). 
The reorganization is discussed in 
section VI of this preamble. 
D. Very Small Quantity Generator 
Conditions for Exemption (40 CFR 
262.14) 
The regulations for VSQGs have 
moved, with some changes, from their 
previous location in § 261.5 to § 262.14 
as part of the reorganization of the 
generator regulations. Although there 
are some changes to these regulations, 
they were mainly relocated from one 
part to the other. Please see section VI 
of this preamble for a discussion of the 
reorganization and for an overview of 
the new § 262.14. 
E. Marking and Labeling and Hazardous 
Waste Numbers (40 CFR 262.15(a)(5), 
262.16(b)(6), 262.17(a)(5), 262.32(b)–(d), 
263.12(b) and 268.50(a)(2)(i) 
This section discusses the final rules 
associated with the marking and 
labeling of hazardous waste 
accumulated on site by SQGs and LQGs 
in containers and tanks. This section 
also addresses the marking and labeling 
requirements for (1) hazardous waste 
transporters that store containers of 
hazardous waste at transfer facilities 
(see 40 CFR 263.12) and (2) TSDFs that 
store containers of hazardous waste 
under the storage prohibition of the land 
disposal restriction requirements at 40 
CFR 268.50(a)(2)(i). Lastly, in this 
section, we discuss the application of 
EPA hazardous waste codes to 
containers prior to shipment off site to 
a designated facility. 
The regulatory changes EPA proposed 
to the marking and labeling for waste 
accumulation units are designed to 
enhance three critical areas: Risk 
communication, emergency 
preparedness and prevention, and the 
accuracy of hazardous waste 
determinations. Although labeling may 
appear to be an inconsequential 
‘‘paperwork’’ exercise, it is, in fact, 
vitally important to ensuring that waste 
is identified and managed properly. 
Without proper labeling, hazardous 
waste may be mismanaged as non- 
hazardous waste, or as the wrong type 
of hazardous waste, which could cause 
harm to human health and the 
environment. As one commenter stated, 
‘‘The department appreciates the 
opportunity to revisit this important 
topic, as we believe [it] is of critical 
importance in both the prevention of 
releases and in ensuring that, in the 
event of a release, the response to the 
incident is appropriate for the materials 
being stored.’’
34 Accordingly, EPA 
proposed to strengthen the marking and 
labeling for containers and tanks 
throughout the cradle to grave 
management chain, including for SAAs, 
SQGs, LQGs, VSQGs that send their 
hazardous waste to LQGs under the 
same control, episodic generators, 
transfer facilities, and TSDFs. The 
Agency proposed consistent changes for 
marking and labeling throughout the 
regulations, and many of the comments 
we received on the topic marking and 
labeling are relevant throughout, so the 
primary discussion of those changes 
will be in this section. In certain 
instances, specific aspects of the 
marking and labeling requirements are 
addressed in other sections of this 
preamble, such as with VSQGs that send 
their hazardous waste to LQGs under 
the same control, episodic generators, 
and SQGs and LQGs that accumulate on 
drip pads and in containment buildings. 
1. Marking and Labeling for SQGs and 
LQGs With Containers in SAAs (40 CFR 
262.15(a)(5)) 
a. Introduction. The previous 
regulations for SAAs in § 262.34(c)(1)(ii) 
required an SQG or LQG to mark its 
SAA containers ‘‘either with the words 
‘Hazardous Waste’ or with other words 
that identify the contents of the 
containers’’ [emphasis added]. The 
Agency proposed two modifications to 
strengthen the labeling and marking 
regulations for containers accumulating 
hazardous waste in SAAs. First, EPA 
proposed to change the ‘‘or’’ to an ‘‘and’’ 
and thus require that generators mark 
containers in the SAA with both the 
words ‘‘Hazardous Waste’’ and ‘‘other 
words to identify the contents of the 
container.’’ Although the words 
‘‘Hazardous Waste’’ are important to 
convey that the container contains a 
waste, as opposed to a product, and that 
a hazardous waste determination has 
been made for the contents, it does not 
convey more practical information 
regarding the contents of the container 
that workers must be familiar with for 
purposes of on-site handling. 
Second, while the words ‘‘Hazardous 
Waste’’ on containers provide some 
measure of information regarding the 
contents, this information fails to 
describe the specific hazards of the 
contents and what risk these wastes 
could pose to human health and the 
environment. EPA believes it is 
important that employees, transporters, 
downstream handlers, emergency 
personnel, and EPA and state inspectors 
know as much as possible about the 
potential hazards of the contents in 
containers being accumulated, 
transported, and managed, whether on 
site and/or off site, so that the hazardous 
wastes are managed in an 
environmentally sound manner. 
Therefore, EPA proposed that SQGs and 
LQGs must indicate the hazards of the 
contents of the containers while giving 
them flexibility in how to comply with 
this new provision. That is, we 
proposed that generators could indicate 
the hazards of the contents of the 
container using any of several 
established methods, including, but not 
limited to an EPA hazardous waste 
characteristic(s) (ignitable, corrosive, 
reactive or toxic); a hazard class label 
consistent with the DOT requirements at 
49 CFR part 172 subpart E (labeling); a 
label consistent with the OSHA Hazard 
Communication Standard at 29 CFR 
1910.1200; a chemical hazard label 
consistent with NFPA code 704; or a 
hazard pictogram consistent with the 
United Nations’ Global Harmonized 
System (GHS). We also proposed that 
generators could also use any other 
marking or labeling commonly used 
nationwide in commerce that would 
alert workers and emergency responders 
to the nature of the hazards associated 
with the contents of the containers. 
These proposed changes were 
designed to alert workers, emergency 
responders, and others to the potential 
hazards posed by the contents of a 
container. Identifying the hazard 
increases awareness to workers and 
others who might come into contact 
with the hazardous waste container and 
reduces potential risks to human health 
and the environment from container 
mismanagement. EPA reasoned that the 
pre-transport requirements of part 262 
subpart C already require hazardous 
waste generators to comply with the 
DOT labeling/marking requirements of 
49 CFR part 172. By requiring generators 
to include information on container 
labels while on site, the Agency 
proposed that generators perform a task 
that is already required when preparing 
the container prior to transporting the 
hazardous waste off site for subsequent 
waste management. Because, in most 
cases the hazardous waste will be 
shipped off site and thus be subject to 
DOT regulations, we proposed that 
SQGs and LQGs could use the DOT 
hazard class labels to comply with the 
new labeling and marking regulation for 
containers in SAAs. However, we 
proposed several alternatives to using 
DOT hazard labels (as noted previously) 
VerDate Sep<11>2014 20:32 Nov 25, 2016 Jkt 241001 PO 00000 Frm 00027 Fmt 4701 Sfmt 4700 E:\FR\FM\28NOR3.SGM 28NOR3mstockstill on DSK3G9T082PROD with RULES3