
31 CFR Part 1010 - General Provisions
=====================================


§ 1010.306 Filing of reports.
-----------------------------

(a)(1) A report required by § 1010.311 or § 1021.311, shall be filed by the financial
institution within 15 days following the day on which the reportable transaction occurred.

(2) A copy of each report filed pursuant to §§ 1010.311, 1010.313, 1020.315, 1021.311 and
1021.313, shall be retained by the financial institution for a period of five years from the
date of the report.

(3) All reports required to be filed by §§ 1010.311, 1010.313, 1020.315, 1021.311 and
1021.313, shall be filed with FinCEN, unless otherwise specified.

(b)(1) A report required by § 1010.340(a) shall be filed at the time of entry into the
United States or at the time of departure, mailing or shipping from the United States,
unless otherwise specified by the Commissioner of Customs and Border Protection.

(2) A report required by § 1010.340(b) shall be filed within 15 days after receipt of the
currency or other monetary instruments.

(3) All reports required by § 1010.340 shall be filed with the Customs officer in charge at
any port of entry or departure, or as otherwise specified by the Commissioner of Customs and
Border Protection. Reports required by § 1010.340(a) for currency or other monetary
instruments not physically accompanying a person entering or departing from the United
States, may be filed by mail on or before the date of entry, departure, mailing or shipping.
All reports required by § 1010.340(b) may also be filed by mail. Reports filed by mail shall
be addressed to the Commissioner of Customs and Border Protection, Attention: Currency
Transportation Reports, Washington, DC 20229.

(c) Reports required to be filed by § 1010.350 shall be filed with FinCEN on or before June
30 of each calendar year with respect to foreign financial accounts exceeding $10,000
maintained during the previous calendar year.

(d) Reports required by § 1010.311, § 1010.313, § 1010.340, § 1010.350, § 1020.315, §
1021.311 or § 1021.313 of this chapter shall be filed on forms prescribed by the Secretary.
All information called for in such forms shall be furnished.

(e) Forms to be used in making the reports required by § 1010.311, § 1010.313, § 1010.350, §
1020.315, § 1021.311 or § 1021.313 of this chapter may be obtained from BSA E-Filing System.
Forms to be used in making the reports required by § 1010.340 may be obtained from the U.S.
Customs and Border Protection or FinCEN.


----------------------------------------------------------------------


§ 1010.311 Filing obligations for reports of transactions in currency.
----------------------------------------------------------------------

Each financial institution other than a casino shall file a report of each deposit,
withdrawal, exchange of currency or other payment or transfer, by, through, or to such
financial institution which involves a transaction in currency of more than $10,000, except
as otherwise provided in this section. In the case of the U.S. Postal Service, the
obligation contained in the preceding sentence shall not apply to payments or transfers made
solely in connection with the purchase of postage or philatelic products.


----------------------------------------------------------------------


§ 1010.313 Aggregation.
-----------------------

(a) Multiple branches. A financial institution includes all of its domestic branch offices,
and any recordkeeping facility, wherever located, that contains records relating to the
transactions of the institution's domestic offices, for purposes of the transactions in
currency reporting requirements in this chapter.

(b) Multiple transactions. In the case of financial institutions other than casinos, for
purposes of the transactions in currency reporting requirements in this chapter, multiple
currency transactions shall be treated as a single transaction if the financial institution
has knowledge that they are by or on behalf of any person and result in either cash in or
cash out totaling more than $10,000 during any one business day (or in the case of the U.S.
Postal Service, any one day). Deposits made at night or over a weekend or holiday shall be
treated as if received on the next business day following the deposit.


----------------------------------------------------------------------


§ 1010.314 Structured transactions.
-----------------------------------

No person shall for the purpose of evading the transactions in currency reporting
requirements of this chapter with respect to such transaction:

(a) Cause or attempt to cause a domestic financial institution to fail to file a report
required under the transactions in currency reporting requirements of this chapter;

(b) Cause or attempt to cause a domestic financial institution to file a report required
under the transactions in currency reporting requirements of this chapter that contains a
material omission or misstatement of fact; or

(c) Structure (as that term is defined in § 1010.100(xx)) or assist in structuring, or
attempt to structure or assist in structuring, any transaction with one or more domestic
financial institutions.


----------------------------------------------------------------------


§ 1010.315 Exemptions for non-bank financial institutions.
----------------------------------------------------------

A non-bank financial institution is not required to file a report otherwise required by §
1010.311 with respect to a transaction in currency between the institution and a commercial
bank.


----------------------------------------------------------------------


§ 1010.330 Reports relating to currency in excess of $10,000 received in a trade or business.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------

(a) Reporting requirement—(1) Reportable transactions—(i) In general. Any person (solely for
purposes of section 5331 of title 31, United States Code and this section, “person” shall
have the same meaning as under 26 U.S.C. 7701(a)(1)) who, in the course of a trade or
business in which such person is engaged, receives currency in excess of $10,000 in 1
transaction (or 2 or more related transactions) shall, except as otherwise provided, make a
report of information with respect to the receipt of currency. This section does not apply
to amounts received in a transaction reported under 31 U.S.C. 5313 and § 1010.311, §
1010.313, § 1020.315, § 1021.311 or § 1021.313 of this chapter.

(ii) Certain financial transactions. Section 6050I of title 26 of the United States Code
requires persons to report information about financial transactions to the IRS, and 31
U.S.C. 5331 requires persons to report the same information to the Financial Crimes
Enforcement Network. This information shall be reported on the same form as prescribed by
the Secretary.

(2) Currency received for the account of another. Currency in excess of $10,000 received by
a person for the account of another must be reported under this section. Thus, for example,
a person who collects delinquent accounts receivable for an automobile dealer must report
with respect to the receipt of currency in excess of $10,000 from the collection of a
particular account even though the proceeds of the collection are credited to the account of
the automobile dealer (i.e., where the rights to the proceeds from the account are retained
by the automobile dealer and the collection is made on a fee-for-service basis).

(3) Currency received by agents— (i) General rule. Except as provided in paragraph
(a)(3)(ii) of this section, a person who in the course of a trade or business acts as an
agent (or in some other similar capacity) and receives currency in excess of $10,000 from a
principal must report the receipt of currency under this section.

(ii) Exception. An agent who receives currency from a principal and uses all of the currency
within 15 days in a currency transaction (the “second currency transaction”) which is
reportable under section 5312 of title 31, or 31 U.S.C. 5331 and this section, and who
discloses the name, address, and TIN of the principal to the recipient in the second
currency transaction need not report the initial receipt of currency under this section. An
agent will be deemed to have met the disclosure requirements of this paragraph (a)(3)(ii) if
the agent discloses only the name of the principal and the agent knows that the recipient
has the principal's address and taxpayer identification number.

(iii) Example. The following example illustrates the application of the rules in paragraphs
(a)(3)(i) and (ii) of this section:

(b) Multiple payments. The receipt of multiple currency deposits or currency installment
payments (or other similar payments or prepayments) relating to a single transaction (or two
or more related transactions), is reported as set forth in paragraphs (b)(1) through (b)(3)
of this section.

(1) Initial payment in excess of $10,000. If the initial payment exceeds $10,000, the
recipient must report the initial payment within 15 days of its receipt.

(2) Initial payment of $10,000 or less. If the initial payment does not exceed $10,000, the
recipient must aggregate the initial payment and subsequent payments made within one year of
the initial payment until the aggregate amount exceeds $10,000, and report with respect to
the aggregate amount within 15 days after receiving the payment that causes the aggregate
amount to exceed $10,000.

(3) Subsequent payments. In addition to any other required report, a report must be made
each time that previously unreportable payments made within a 12-month period with respect
to a single transaction (or two or more related transactions), individually or in the
aggregate, exceed $10,000. The report must be made within 15 days after receiving the
payment in excess of $10,000 or the payment that causes the aggregate amount received in the
12-month period to exceed $10,000. (If more than one report would otherwise be required for
multiple currency payments within a 15-day period that relate to a single transaction (or
two or more related transactions), the recipient may make a single combined report with
respect to the payments. The combined report must be made no later than the date by which
the first of the separate reports would otherwise be required to be made.)

(4) Example. The following example illustrates the application of the rules in paragraphs
(b)(1) through (b)(3) of this section:

(c) Meaning of terms. The following definitions apply for purposes of this section—

(1) Currency. The term currency means—

(i) The coin and currency of the United States or of any other country, which circulate in
and are customarily used and accepted as money in the country in which issued; and

(ii) A cashier's check (by whatever name called, including “treasurer's check” and “bank
check”), bank draft, traveler's check, or money order having a face amount of not more than
$10,000—

(A) Received in a designated reporting transaction as defined in paragraph (c)(2) of this
section (except as provided in paragraphs (c)(3), (4), and (5) of this section), or

(B) Received in any transaction in which the recipient knows that such instrument is being
used in an attempt to avoid the reporting of the transaction under section 5331 and this
section.

(2) Designated reporting transaction. A designated reporting transaction is a retail sale
(or the receipt of funds by a broker or other intermediary in connection with a retail sale)
of—

(i) A consumer durable,

(ii) A collectible, or

(iii) A travel or entertainment activity.

(3) Exception for certain loans. A cashier's check, bank draft, traveler's check, or money
order received in a designated reporting transaction is not treated as currency pursuant to
paragraph (c)(1)(ii)(A) of this section if the instrument constitutes the proceeds of a loan
from a bank. The recipient may rely on a copy of the loan document, a written statement from
the bank, or similar documentation (such as a written lien instruction from the issuer of
the instrument) to substantiate that the instrument constitutes loan proceeds.

(4) Exception for certain installment sales. A cashier's check, bank draft, traveler's
check, or money order received in a designated reporting transaction is not treated as
currency pursuant to paragraph (c)(1)(ii)(A) of this section if the instrument is received
in payment on a promissory note or an installment sales contract (including a lease that is
considered to be a sale for Federal income tax purposes). However, the preceding sentence
applies only if—

(i) Promissory notes or installment sales contracts with the same or substantially similar
terms are used in the ordinary course of the recipient's trade or business in connection
with sales to ultimate consumers; and

(ii) The total amount of payments with respect to the sale that are received on or before
the 60th day after the date of the sale does not exceed 50 percent of the purchase price of
the sale.

(5) Exception for certain down payment plans. A cashier's check, bank draft, traveler's
check, or money order received in a designated reporting transaction is not treated as
currency pursuant to paragraph (c)(1)(ii)(A) of this section if the instrument is received
pursuant to a payment plan requiring one or more down payments and the payment of the
balance of the purchase price by a date no later than the date of the sale (in the case of
an item of travel or entertainment, a date no later than the earliest date that any item of
travel or entertainment pertaining to the same trip or event is furnished). However, the
preceding sentence applies only if—

(i) The recipient uses payment plans with the same or substantially similar terms in the
ordinary course of its trade or business in connection with sales to ultimate consumers; and

(ii) The instrument is received more than 60 days prior to the date of the sale (in the case
of an item of travel or entertainment, the date on which the final payment is due).

(6) Examples. The following examples illustrate the definition of “currency” set forth in
paragraphs (c)(1) through (c)(5) of this section:

(7) Consumer durable. The term consumer durable means an item of tangible personal property
of a type that is suitable under ordinary usage for personal consumption or use, that can
reasonably be expected to be useful for at least 1 year under ordinary usage, and that has a
sales price of more than $10,000. Thus, for example, a $20,000 automobile is a consumer
durable (whether or not it is sold for business use), but a $20,000 dump truck or a $20,000
factory machine is not.

(8) Collectible. The term collectible means an item described in paragraphs (A) through (D)
of section 408 (m)(2) of title 26 of the United States Code (determined without regard to
section 408 (m)(3) of title 26 of the United States Code).

(9) Travel or entertainment activity. The term travel or entertainment activity means an
item of travel or entertainment (within the meaning of 26 CFR 1.274-2(b)(1)) pertaining to a
single trip or event where the aggregate sales price of the item and all other items
pertaining to the same trip or event that are sold in the same transaction (or related
transactions) exceeds $10,000.

(10) Retail sale. The term retail sale means any sale (whether for resale or for any other
purpose) made in the course of a trade or business if that trade or business principally
consists of making sales to ultimate consumers.

(11) Trade or business. The term trade or business has the same meaning as under section 162
of title 26, United States Code.

(12) Transaction. (i) Solely for purposes of 31 U.S.C. 5331 and this section, the term
transaction means the underlying event precipitating the payer's transfer of currency to the
recipient. In this context, transactions include (but are not limited to) a sale of goods or
services; a sale of real property; a sale of intangible property; a rental of real or
personal property; an exchange of currency for other currency; the establishment or
maintenance of or contribution to a custodial, trust, or escrow arrangement; a payment of a
preexisting debt; a conversion of currency to a negotiable instrument; a reimbursement for
expenses paid; or the making or repayment of a loan. A transaction may not be divided into
multiple transactions in order to avoid reporting under this section.

(ii) The term related transactions means any transaction conducted between a payer (or its
agent) and a recipient of currency in a 24-hour period. Additionally, transactions conducted
between a payer (or its agent) and a currency recipient during a period of more than 24
hours are related if the recipient knows or has reason to know that each transaction is one
of a series of connected transactions.

(iii) The following examples illustrate the definition of paragraphs (c)(12)(i) and (ii) of
this section:

(13) Recipient. (i) The term recipient means the person receiving the currency. Except as
provided in paragraph (c)(13)(ii) of this section, each store, division, branch, department,
headquarters, or office (“branch”) (regardless of physical location) comprising a portion of
a person's trade or business shall for purposes of this section be deemed a separate
recipient.

(ii) A branch that receives currency payments will not be deemed a separate recipient if the
branch (or a central unit linking such branch with other branches) would in the ordinary
course of business have reason to know the identity of payers making currency payments to
other branches of such person.

(iii) Examples. The following examples illustrate the application of the rules in paragraphs
(c)(13)(i) and (ii) of this section:

(d) Exceptions to the reporting requirements of 31 U.S.C. 5331—(1) Receipt is made with
respect to a foreign currency transaction—(i) In general. Generally, there is no requirement
to report with respect to a currency transaction if the entire transaction occurs outside
the United States (the fifty states and the District of Columbia). An entire transaction
consists of both the transaction as defined in paragraph (c)(12)(i) of this section and the
receipt of currency by the recipient. If, however, any part of an entire transaction occurs
in the Commonwealth of Puerto Rico or a possession or territory of the United States and the
recipient of currency in that transaction is subject to the general jurisdiction of the
Internal Revenue Service under title 26 of the United States Code, the recipient is required
to report the transaction under this section.

(ii) Example. The following example illustrates the application of the rules in paragraph
(d)(1)(i) of this section:

(2) Receipt of currency not in the course of the recipient's trade or business. The receipt
of currency in excess of $10,000 by a person other than in the course of the person's trade
or business is not reportable under 31 U.S.C. 5331. Thus, for example, F, an individual in
the trade or business of selling real estate, sells a motorboat for $12,000, the purchase
price of which is paid in currency. F did not use the motorboat in any trade or business in
which F was engaged. F is not required to report under 31 U.S.C. 5331 or this section
because the exception provided in this paragraph (d)(2) applies.

(e) Time, manner, and form of reporting—(1) In general. The reports required by paragraph
(a) of this section must be made by filing a Form 8300, as specified in 26 CFR
1.6050I-1(e)(2). The reports must be filed at the time and in the manner specified in 26 CFR
1.6050I-1(e)(1) and (3) respectively.

(2) Verification. A person making a report of information under this section must verify the
identity of the person from whom the reportable currency is received. Verification of the
identity of a person who purports to be an alien must be made by examination of such
person's passport, alien identification card, or other official document evidencing
nationality or residence. Verification of the identity of any other person may be made by
examination of a document normally acceptable as a means of identification when cashing or
accepting checks (for example, a driver's license or a credit card). In addition, a report
will be considered incomplete if the person required to make a report knows (or has reason
to know) that an agent is conducting the transaction for a principal, and the return does
not identify both the principal and the agent.

(3) Retention of reports. A person required to make a report under this section must keep a
copy of each report filed for five years from the date of filing.


----------------------------------------------------------------------


§ 1010.410 Records to be made and retained by financial institutions.
---------------------------------------------------------------------

Each financial institution shall retain either the original or a copy or reproduction of
each of the following:

(a) A record of each extension of credit in an amount in excess of $10,000, except an
extension of credit secured by an interest in real property, which record shall contain the
name and address of the person to whom the extension of credit is made, the amount thereof,
the nature or purpose thereof, and the date thereof;

(b) A record of each advice, request, or instruction received or given regarding any
transaction resulting (or intended to result and later canceled if such a record is normally
made) in the transfer of currency or other monetary instruments, funds, checks, investment
securities, or credit, of more than $10,000 to or from any person, account, or place outside
the United States.

(c) A record of each advice, request, or instruction given to another financial institution
or other person located within or without the United States, regarding a transaction
intended to result in the transfer of funds, or of currency, other monetary instruments,
checks, investment securities, or credit, of more than $10,000 to a person, account or place
outside the United States.

(d) A record of such information for such period of time as the Secretary may require in an
order issued under § 1010.370(a), not to exceed five years.

(e) Nonbank financial institutions. Each agent, agency, branch, or office located within the
United States of a financial institution other than a bank is subject to the requirements of
this paragraph (e) with respect to a transmittal of funds in the amount of $3,000 or more:

(1) Recordkeeping requirements. (i) For each transmittal order that it accepts as a
transmittor's financial institution, a financial institution shall obtain and retain either
the original or a microfilm, other copy, or electronic record of the following information
relating to the transmittal order:

(A) The name and address of the transmittor;

(B) The amount of the transmittal order;

(C) The execution date of the transmittal order;

(D) Any payment instructions received from the transmittor with the transmittal order;

(E) The identity of the recipient's financial institution;

(F) As many of the following items as are received with the transmittal order: 1

1 For transmittals of funds effected through the Federal Reserve's Fedwire funds transfer
system by a domestic broker or dealers in securities, only one of the items is required to
be retained, if received with the transmittal order, until such time as the bank that sends
the order to the Federal Reserve Bank completes its conversion to the expanded Fedwire
message format.

(1) The name and address of the recipient;

(2) The account number of the recipient; and

(3) Any other specific identifier of the recipient; and

(G) Any form relating to the transmittal of funds that is completed or signed by the person
placing the transmittal order.

(ii) For each transmittal order that it accepts as an intermediary financial institution, a
financial institution shall retain either the original or a microfilm, other copy, or
electronic record of the transmittal order.

(iii) For each transmittal order that it accepts as a recipient's financial institution, a
financial institution shall retain either the original or a microfilm, other copy, or
electronic record of the transmittal order.

(2) Transmittors other than established customers. In the case of a transmittal order from a
transmittor that is not an established customer, in addition to obtaining and retaining the
information required in paragraph (e)(1)(i) of this section:

(i) If the transmittal order is made in person, prior to acceptance the transmittor's
financial institution shall verify the identity of the person placing the transmittal order.
If it accepts the transmittal order, the transmittor's financial institution shall obtain
and retain a record of the name and address, the type of identification reviewed, and the
number of the identification document (e.g., driver's license), as well as a record of the
person's taxpayer identification number (e.g., social security or employer identification
number) or, if none, alien identification number or passport number and country of issuance,
or a notation in the record of the lack thereof. If the transmittor's financial institution
has knowledge that the person placing the transmittal order is not the transmittor, the
transmittor's financial institution shall obtain and retain a record of the transmittor's
taxpayer identification number (e.g., social security or employer identification number) or,
if none, alien identification number or passport number and country of issuance, if known by
the person placing the order, or a notation in the record of the lack thereof.

(ii) If the transmittal order accepted by the transmittor's financial institution is not
made in person, the transmittor's financial institution shall obtain and retain a record of
the name and address of the person placing the transmittal order, as well as the person's
taxpayer identification number (e.g., social security or employer identification number) or,
if none, alien identification number or passport number and country of issuance, or a
notation in the record of the lack thereof, and a copy or record of the method of payment
(e.g., check or credit card transaction) for the transmittal of funds. If the transmittor's
financial institution has knowledge that the person placing the transmittal order is not the
transmittor, the transmittor's financial institution shall obtain and retain a record of the
transmittor's taxpayer identification number (e.g., social security or employer
identification number) or, if none, alien identification number or passport number and
country of issuance, if known by the person placing the order, or a notation in the record
of the lack thereof.

(3) Recipients other than established customers. For each transmittal order that it accepts
as a recipient's financial institution for a recipient that is not an established customer,
in addition to obtaining and retaining the information required in paragraph (e)(1)(iii) of
this section:

(i) If the proceeds are delivered in person to the recipient or its representative or agent,
the recipient's financial institution shall verify the identity of the person receiving the
proceeds and shall obtain and retain a record of the name and address, the type of
identification reviewed, and the number of the identification document (e.g., driver's
license), as well as a record of the person's taxpayer identification number (e.g., social
security or employer identification number) or, if none, alien identification number or
passport number and country of issuance, or a notation in the record of the lack thereof. If
the recipient's financial institution has knowledge that the person receiving the proceeds
is not the recipient, the recipient's financial institution shall obtain and retain a record
of the recipient's name and address, as well as the recipient's taxpayer identification
number (e.g., social security or employer identification number) or, if none, alien
identification number or passport number and country of issuance, if known by the person
receiving the proceeds, or a notation in the record of the lack thereof.

(ii) If the proceeds are delivered other than in person, the recipient's financial
institution shall retain a copy of the check or other instrument used to effect payment, or
the information contained thereon, as well as the name and address of the person to which it
was sent.

(4) Retrievability. The information that a transmittor's financial institution must retain
under paragraphs (e)(1)(i) and (e)(2) of this section shall be retrievable by the
transmittor's financial institution by reference to the name of the transmittor. If the
transmittor is an established customer of the transmittor's financial institution and has an
account used for transmittals of funds, then the information also shall be retrievable by
account number. The information that a recipient's financial institution must retain under
paragraphs (e)(1)(iii) and (e)(3) of this section shall be retrievable by the recipient's
financial institution by reference to the name of the recipient. If the recipient is an
established customer of the recipient's financial institution and has an account used for
transmittals of funds, then the information also shall be retrievable by account number.
This information need not be retained in any particular manner, so long as the financial
institution is able to retrieve the information required by this paragraph, either by
accessing transmittal of funds records directly or through reference to some other record
maintained by the financial institution.

(5) Verification. Where verification is required under paragraphs (e)(2) and (e)(3) of this
section, a financial institution shall verify a person's identity by examination of a
document (other than a customer signature card), preferably one that contains the person's
name, address, and photograph, that is normally acceptable by financial institutions as a
means of identification when cashing checks for persons other than established customers.
Verification of the identity of an individual who indicates that he or she is an alien or is
not a resident of the United States may be made by passport, alien identification card, or
other official document evidencing nationality or residence (e.g., a foreign driver's
license with indication of home address).

(6) Exceptions. The following transmittals of funds are not subject to the requirements of
this section:

(i) Transmittals of funds where the transmittor and the recipient are any of the following:

(A) A bank;

(B) A wholly-owned domestic subsidiary of a bank chartered in the United States;

(C) A broker or dealer in securities;

(D) A wholly-owned domestic subsidiary of a broker or dealer in securities;

(E) A futures commission merchant or an introducing broker in commodities;

(F) A wholly-owned domestic subsidiary of a futures commission merchant or an introducing
broker in commodities;

(G) The United States;

(H) A state or local government; or

(I) A Federal, State or local government agency or instrumentality; or

(J) A mutual fund; and

(ii) Transmittals of funds where both the transmittor and the recipient are the same person
and the transmittor's financial institution and the recipient's financial institution are
the same broker or dealer in securities.

(f) Any transmittor's financial institution or intermediary financial institution located
within the United States shall include in any transmittal order for a transmittal of funds
in the amount of $3,000 or more, information as required in this paragraph (f):

(1) A transmittor's financial institution shall include in a transmittal order, at the time
it is sent to a receiving financial institution, the following information:

(i) The name and, if the payment is ordered from an account, the account number of the
transmittor;

(ii) The address of the transmittor, except for a transmittal order through Fedwire until
such time as the bank that sends the order to the Federal Reserve Bank completes its
conversion to the expanded Fedwire format;

(iii) The amount of the transmittal order;

(iv) The execution date of the transmittal order;

(v) The identity of the recipient's financial institution;

(vi) As many of the following items as are received with the transmittal order: 2

2 For transmittals of funds effected through the Federal Reserve's Fedwire funds transfer
system by a financial institution, only one of the items is required to be included in the
transmittal order, if received with the sender's transmittal order, until such time as the
bank that sends the order to the Federal Reserve Bank completes its conversion to the
expanded Fedwire message format.

(A) The name and address of the recipient;

(B) The account number of the recipient;

(C) Any other specific identifier of the recipient; and

(vii) Either the name and address or numerical identifier of the transmittor's financial
institution.

(2) A receiving financial institution that acts as an intermediary financial institution, if
it accepts a transmittal order, shall include in a corresponding transmittal order at the
time it is sent to the next receiving financial institution, the following information, if
received from the sender:

(i) The name and the account number of the transmittor;

(ii) The address of the transmittor, except for a transmittal order through Fedwire until
such time as the bank that sends the order to the Federal Reserve Bank completes its
conversion to the expanded Fedwire format;

(iii) The amount of the transmittal order;

(iv) The execution date of the transmittal order;

(v) The identity of the recipient's financial institution;

(vi) As many of the following items as are received with the transmittal order: 3

3 For transmittals of funds effected through the Federal Reserve's Fedwire funds transfer
system by a financial institution, only one of the items is required to be included in the
transmittal order, if received with the sender's transmittal order, until such time as the
bank that sends the order to the Federal Reserve Bank completes its conversion to the
expanded Fedwire message format.

(A) The name and address of the recipient;

(B) The account number of the recipient;

(C) Any other specific identifier of the recipient; and

(vii) Either the name and address or numerical identifier of the transmittor's financial
institution.

(3) Safe harbor for transmittals of funds prior to conversion to the expanded Fedwire
message format. The following provisions apply to transmittals of funds effected through the
Federal Reserve's Fedwire funds transfer system or otherwise by a financial institution
before the bank that sends the order to the Federal Reserve Bank or otherwise completes its
conversion to the expanded Fedwire message format.

(i) Transmittor's financial institution. A transmittor's financial institution will be
deemed to be in compliance with the provisions of paragraph (f)(1) of this section if it:

(A) Includes in the transmittal order, at the time it is sent to the receiving financial
institution, the information specified in paragraphs (f)(1)(iii) through (v), and the
information specified in paragraph (f)(1)(vi) of this section to the extent that such
information has been received by the financial institution, and

(B) Provides the information specified in paragraphs (f)(1)(i), (ii) and (vii) of this
section to a financial institution that acted as an intermediary financial institution or
recipient's financial institution in connection with the transmittal order, within a
reasonable time after any such financial institution makes a request therefor in connection
with the requesting financial institution's receipt of a lawful request for such information
from a Federal, State, or local law enforcement or financial regulatory agency, or in
connection with the requesting financial institution's own Bank Secrecy Act compliance
program.

(ii) Intermediary financial institution. An intermediary financial institution will be
deemed to be in compliance with the provisions of paragraph (f)(2) of this section if it:

(A) Includes in the transmittal order, at the time it is sent to the receiving financial
institution, the information specified in paragraphs (f)(2)(iii) through (f)(2)(vi) of this
section, to the extent that such information has been received by the intermediary financial
institution; and

(B) Provides the information specified in paragraphs (f)(2)(i), (ii) and (vii) of this
section, to the extent that such information has been received by the intermediary financial
institution, to a financial institution that acted as an intermediary financial institution
or recipient's financial institution in connection with the transmittal order, within a
reasonable time after any such financial institution makes a request therefor in connection
with the requesting financial institution's receipt of a lawful request for such information
from a Federal, State, or local law enforcement or regulatory agency, or in connection with
the requesting financial institution's own Bank Secrecy Act compliance program.

(iii) Obligation of requesting financial institution. Any information requested under
paragraph (f)(3)(i)(B) or (f)(3)(ii)(B) of this section shall be treated by the requesting
institution, once received, as if it had been included in the transmittal order to which
such information relates.

(4) Exceptions. The requirements of this paragraph (f) shall not apply to transmittals of
funds that are listed in paragraph (e)(6) of this section or § 1020.410(a)(6) of this
chapter.
