
31 CFR Part 1020 - Rules for Banks
==================================


§ 1020.100 Definitions.
-----------------------

Refer to § 1010.100 of this Chapter for general definitions not noted herein. To the extent
there is a differing definition in § 1010.100 of this chapter, the definition in this
Section is what applies to part 1020. Unless otherwise indicated, for purposes of this part:

(a) Account. For purposes of § 1020.220:

(1) Account means a formal banking relationship established to provide or engage in
services, dealings, or other financial transactions including a deposit account, a
transaction or asset account, a credit account, or other extension of credit. Account also
includes a relationship established to provide a safety deposit box or other safekeeping
services, or cash management, custodian, and trust services.

(2) Account does not include:

(i) A product or service where a formal banking relationship is not established with a
person, such as check-cashing, wire transfer, or sale of a check or money order;

(ii) An account that the bank acquires through an acquisition, merger, purchase of assets,
or assumption of liabilities; or

(iii) An account opened for the purpose of participating in an employee benefit plan
established under the Employee Retirement Income Security Act of 1974.

(b) Customer. For the purposes of § 1020.220:

(1) Customer means:

(i) A person that opens a new account; and

(ii) An individual who opens a new account for:

(A) An individual who lacks legal capacity, such as a minor; or

(B) An entity that is not a legal person, such as a civic club.

(2) Customer does not include:

(i) A financial institution regulated by a Federal functional regulator or a bank regulated
by a State bank regulator;

(ii) A person described in § 1020.315(b)(2) through (b)(4); or

(iii) A person that has an existing account with the bank, provided that the bank has a
reasonable belief that it knows the true identity of the person.


----------------------------------------------------------------------


§ 1020.210 Anti-money laundering program requirements for banks.
----------------------------------------------------------------

(a) Anti-money laundering program requirements for banks regulated by a Federal functional
regulator, including banks, savings associations, and credit unions. A bank regulated by a
Federal functional regulator shall be deemed to satisfy the requirements of 31 U.S.C.
5318(h)(1) if it implements and maintains an anti-money laundering program that:

(1) Complies with the requirements of §§ 1010.610 and 1010.620 of this chapter;

(2) Includes, at a minimum:

(i) A system of internal controls to assure ongoing compliance;

(ii) Independent testing for compliance to be conducted by bank personnel or by an outside
party;

(iii) Designation of an individual or individuals responsible for coordinating and
monitoring day-to-day compliance;

(iv) Training for appropriate personnel; and

(v) Appropriate risk-based procedures for conducting ongoing customer due diligence, to
include, but not be limited to:

(A) Understanding the nature and purpose of customer relationships for the purpose of
developing a customer risk profile; and

(B) Conducting ongoing monitoring to identify and report suspicious transactions and, on a
risk basis, to maintain and update customer information. For purposes of this paragraph,
customer information shall include information regarding the beneficial owners of legal
entity customers (as defined in § 1010.230 of this chapter); and

(3) Complies with the regulation of its Federal functional regulator governing such
programs.

(b) Anti-money laundering program requirements for banks lacking a Federal functional
regulator including, but not limited to, private banks, non-federally insured credit unions,
and certain trust companies. A bank lacking a Federal functional regulator shall be deemed
to satisfy the requirements of 31 U.S.C. 5318(h)(1) if the bank establishes and maintains a
written anti-money laundering program that:

(1) Complies with the requirements of §§ 1010.610 and 1010.620 of this chapter; and

(2) Includes, at a minimum:

(i) A system of internal controls to assure ongoing compliance with the Bank Secrecy Act and
the regulations set forth in 31 CFR Chapter X;

(ii) Independent testing for compliance to be conducted by bank personnel or by an outside
party;

(iii) Designation of an individual or individuals responsible for coordinating and
monitoring day-to-day compliance;

(iv) Training for appropriate personnel; and

(v) Appropriate risk-based procedures for conducting ongoing customer due diligence, to
include, but not be limited to:

(A) Understanding the nature and purpose of customer relationships for the purpose of
developing a customer risk profile; and

(B) Conducting ongoing monitoring to identify and report suspicious transactions and, on a
risk basis, to maintain and update customer information. For purposes of this paragraph,
customer information shall include information regarding the beneficial owners of legal
entity customers (as defined in § 1010.230); and

(3) Is approved by the board of directors or, if the bank does not have a board of
directors, an equivalent governing body within the bank. The bank shall make a copy of its
anti-money laundering program available to the Financial Crimes Enforcement Network or its
designee upon request.


----------------------------------------------------------------------


§ 1020.220 Customer identification program requirements for banks.
------------------------------------------------------------------

(a) Customer Identification Program: minimum requirements—(1) In general. A bank required to
have an anti-money laundering compliance program under the regulations implementing 31
U.S.C. 5318(h), 12 U.S.C. 1818(s), or 12 U.S.C. 1786(q)(1) must implement a written Customer
Identification Program (CIP) appropriate for the bank's size and type of business that, at a
minimum, includes each of the requirements of paragraphs (a)(1) through (5) of this section.
The CIP must be a part of the anti-money laundering compliance program.

(2) Identity verification procedures. The CIP must include risk-based procedures for
verifying the identity of each customer to the extent reasonable and practicable. The
procedures must enable the bank to form a reasonable belief that it knows the true identity
of each customer. These procedures must be based on the bank's assessment of the relevant
risks, including those presented by the various types of accounts maintained by the bank,
the various methods of opening accounts provided by the bank, the various types of
identifying information available, and the bank's size, location, and customer base. At a
minimum, these procedures must contain the elements described in this paragraph (a)(2).

(i) Customer information required—(A) In general. The CIP must contain procedures for
opening an account that specify the identifying information that will be obtained from each
customer. Except as permitted by paragraphs (a)(2)(i)(B) and (C) of this section, the bank
must obtain, at a minimum, the following information from the customer prior to opening an
account:

(1) Name;

(2) Date of birth, for an individual;

(3) Address, which shall be:

(i) For an individual, a residential or business street address;

(ii) For an individual who does not have a residential or business street address, an Army
Post Office (APO) or Fleet Post Office (FPO) box number, or the residential or business
street address of next of kin or of another contact individual; or

(iii) For a person other than an individual (such as a corporation, partnership, or trust),
a principal place of business, local office, or other physical location; and

(4) Identification number, which shall be:

(i) For a U.S. person, a taxpayer identification number; or

(ii) For a non-U.S. person, one or more of the following: A taxpayer identification number;
passport number and country of issuance; alien identification card number; or number and
country of issuance of any other government-issued document evidencing nationality or
residence and bearing a photograph or similar safeguard.

When opening an account for a foreign business or enterprise that does not have an
identification number, the bank must request alternative government-issued documentation
certifying the existence of the business or enterprise.

(B) Exception for persons applying for a taxpayer identification number. Instead of
obtaining a taxpayer identification number from a customer prior to opening the account, the
CIP may include procedures for opening an account for a customer that has applied for, but
has not received, a taxpayer identification number. In this case, the CIP must include
procedures to confirm that the application was filed before the customer opens the account
and to obtain the taxpayer identification number within a reasonable period of time after
the account is opened.

(C) Credit card accounts. In connection with a customer who opens a credit card account, a
bank may obtain the identifying information about a customer required under paragraph
(a)(2)(i)(A) by acquiring it from a third-party source prior to extending credit to the
customer.

(ii) Customer verification. The CIP must contain procedures for verifying the identity of
the customer, using information obtained in accordance with paragraph (a)(2)(i) of this
section, within a reasonable time after the account is opened. The procedures must describe
when the bank will use documents, non-documentary methods, or a combination of both methods
as described in this paragraph (a)(2)(ii).

(A) Verification through documents. For a bank relying on documents, the CIP must contain
procedures that set forth the documents that the bank will use. These documents may include:

(1) For an individual, unexpired government-issued identification evidencing nationality or
residence and bearing a photograph or similar safeguard, such as a driver's license or
passport; and

(2) For a person other than an individual (such as a corporation, partnership, or trust),
documents showing the existence of the entity, such as certified articles of incorporation,
a government-issued business license, a partnership agreement, or trust instrument.

(B) Verification through non-documentary methods. For a bank relying on non-documentary
methods, the CIP must contain procedures that describe the non-documentary methods the bank
will use.

(1) These methods may include contacting a customer; independently verifying the customer's
identity through the comparison of information provided by the customer with information
obtained from a consumer reporting agency, public database, or other source; checking
references with other financial institutions; and obtaining a financial statement.

(2) The bank's non-documentary procedures must address situations where an individual is
unable to present an unexpired government-issued identification document that bears a
photograph or similar safeguard; the bank is not familiar with the documents presented; the
account is opened without obtaining documents; the customer opens the account without
appearing in person at the bank; and where the bank is otherwise presented with
circumstances that increase the risk that the bank will be unable to verify the true
identity of a customer through documents.

(C) Additional verification for certain customers. The CIP must address situations where,
based on the bank's risk assessment of a new account opened by a customer that is not an
individual, the bank will obtain information about individuals with authority or control
over such account, including signatories, in order to verify the customer's identity. This
verification method applies only when the bank cannot verify the customer's true identity
using the verification methods described in paragraphs (a)(2)(ii)(A) and (B) of this
section.

(iii) Lack of verification. The CIP must include procedures for responding to circumstances
in which the bank cannot form a reasonable belief that it knows the true identity of a
customer. These procedures should describe:

(A) When the bank should not open an account;

(B) The terms under which a customer may use an account while the bank attempts to verify
the customer's identity;

(C) When the bank should close an account, after attempts to verify a customer's identity
have failed; and

(D) When the bank should file a Suspicious Activity Report in accordance with applicable law
and regulation.

(3) Recordkeeping. The CIP must include procedures for making and maintaining a record of
all information obtained under the procedures implementing paragraph (a) of this section.

(i) Required records. At a minimum, the record must include:

(A) All identifying information about a customer obtained under paragraph (a)(2)(i) of this
section;

(B) A description of any document that was relied on under paragraph (a)(2)(ii)(A) of this
section noting the type of document, any identification number contained in the document,
the place of issuance and, if any, the date of issuance and expiration date;

(C) A description of the methods and the results of any measures undertaken to verify the
identity of the customer under paragraph (a)(2)(ii)(B) or (C) of this section; and

(D) A description of the resolution of any substantive discrepancy discovered when verifying
the identifying information obtained.

(ii) Retention of records. The bank must retain the information in paragraph (a)(3)(i)(A) of
this section for five years after the date the account is closed or, in the case of credit
card accounts, five years after the account is closed or becomes dormant. The bank must
retain the information in paragraphs (a)(3)(i)(B), (C), and (D) of this section for five
years after the record is made.

(4) Comparison with government lists. The CIP must include procedures for determining
whether the customer appears on any list of known or suspected terrorists or terrorist
organizations issued by any Federal government agency and designated as such by Treasury in
consultation with the Federal functional regulators. The procedures must require the bank to
make such a determination within a reasonable period of time after the account is opened, or
earlier, if required by another Federal law or regulation or Federal directive issued in
connection with the applicable list. The procedures must also require the bank to follow all
Federal directives issued in connection with such lists.

(5)(i) Customer notice. The CIP must include procedures for providing bank customers with
adequate notice that the bank is requesting information to verify their identities.

(ii) Adequate notice. Notice is adequate if the bank generally describes the identification
requirements of this section and provides the notice in a manner reasonably designed to
ensure that a customer is able to view the notice, or is otherwise given notice, before
opening an account. For example, depending upon the manner in which the account is opened, a
bank may post a notice in the lobby or on its Web site, include the notice on its account
applications, or use any other form of written or oral notice.

(iii) Sample notice. If appropriate, a bank may use the following sample language to provide
notice to its customers:

Important Information About Procedures for Opening a New Account To help the government
fight the funding of terrorism and money laundering activities, Federal law requires all
financial institutions to obtain, verify, and record information that identifies each person
who opens an account. What this means for you: When you open an account, we will ask for
your name, address, date of birth, and other information that will allow us to identify you.
We may also ask to see your driver's license or other identifying documents.

(6) Reliance on another financial institution. The CIP may include procedures specifying
when a bank will rely on the performance by another financial institution (including an
affiliate) of any procedures of the bank's CIP, with respect to any customer of the bank
that is opening, or has opened, an account or has established a similar formal banking or
business relationship with the other financial institution to provide or engage in services,
dealings, or other financial transactions, provided that:

(i) Such reliance is reasonable under the circumstances;

(ii) The other financial institution is subject to a rule implementing 31 U.S.C. 5318(h) and
is regulated by a Federal functional regulator; and

(iii) The other financial institution enters into a contract requiring it to certify
annually to the bank that it has implemented its anti-money laundering program, and that it
will perform (or its agent will perform) the specified requirements of the bank's CIP.

(b) Exemptions. The appropriate Federal functional regulator, with the concurrence of the
Secretary, may, by order or regulation, exempt any bank or type of account from the
requirements of this section. The Federal functional regulator and the Secretary shall
consider whether the exemption is consistent with the purposes of the Bank Secrecy Act and
with safe and sound banking, and may consider other appropriate factors. The Secretary will
make these determinations for any bank or type of account that is not subject to the
authority of a Federal functional regulator.

(c) Other requirements unaffected. Nothing in this section relieves a bank of its obligation
to comply with any other provision in this chapter, including provisions concerning
information that must be obtained, verified, or maintained in connection with any account or
transaction.


----------------------------------------------------------------------


§ 1020.310 Reports of transactions in currency.
-----------------------------------------------

The reports of transactions in currency requirements for banks are located in subpart C of
part 1010 of this chapter and this subpart.


----------------------------------------------------------------------


§ 1020.315 Transactions of exempt persons.
------------------------------------------

(a) General. No bank is required to file a report otherwise required by § 1010.311 with
respect to any transaction in currency between an exempt person and such bank, or, to the
extent provided in paragraph (e)(6) of this section, between such exempt person and other
banks affiliated with such bank. (A limitation on the exemption described in this paragraph
(a) is set forth in paragraph (f) of this section.)

(b) Exempt person. For purposes of this section, an exempt person is:

(1) A bank, to the extent of such bank's domestic operations;

(2) A department or agency of the United States, of any State, or of any political
subdivision of any State;

(3) Any entity established under the laws of the United States, of any State, or of any
political subdivision of any State, or under an interstate compact between two or more
States, that exercises governmental authority on behalf of the United States or any such
State or political subdivision;

(4) Any entity, other than a bank, whose common stock or analogous equity interests are
listed on the New York Stock Exchange or the American Stock Exchange or whose common stock
or analogous equity interests have been designated as a NASDAQ National Market Security
listed on the NASDAQ Stock Market (except stock or interests listed under the separate
“NASDAQ Capital Markets Companies” heading), provided that, for purposes of this paragraph
(b)(4), a person that is a financial institution, other than a bank, is an exempt person
only to the extent of its domestic operations;

(5) Any subsidiary, other than a bank, of any entity described in paragraph (b)(4) of this
section (a “listed entity”) that is organized under the laws of the United States or of any
State and at least 51 percent of whose common stock or analogous equity interest is owned by
the listed entity, provided that, for purposes of this paragraph (b)(5), a person that is a
financial institution, other than a bank, is an exempt person only to the extent of its
domestic operations;

(6) To the extent of its domestic operations and only with respect to transactions conducted
through its exemptible accounts, any other commercial enterprise (for purposes of this
section, a “non-listed business”), other than an enterprise specified in paragraph (e)(8) of
this section, that:

(i) Maintains a transaction account, as defined in paragraph (e)(9) of this section, at the
bank for at least two months, except as provided in paragraph (c)(2)(ii) of this section;

(ii) Frequently engages in transactions in currency with the bank in excess of $10,000; and

(iii) Is incorporated or organized under the laws of the United States or a State, or is
registered as and eligible to do business within the United States or a State; or

(7) With respect solely to withdrawals for payroll purposes from existing exemptible
accounts, any other person (for purposes of this section, a “payroll customer”) that:

(i) Maintains a transaction account, as defined in paragraph (e)(9) of this section, at the
bank for at least two months, except as provided in paragraph (c)(2)(ii) of this section;

(ii) Operates a firm that frequently withdraws more than $10,000 in order to pay its United
States employees in currency; and

(iii) Is incorporated or organized under the laws of the United States or a State, or is
registered as and eligible to do business within the United States or a State.

(c) Designation of certain exempt persons—(1) General. Except as provided in paragraph
(c)(2) of this section, a bank must designate an exempt person by filing FinCEN Form 110.
Such designation must occur by the close of the 30-calendar day period beginning after the
day of the first reportable transaction in currency with that person sought to be exempted
from reporting under the terms of this section. The designation must be made separately by
each bank that treats the customer as an exempt person, except as provided in paragraph
(e)(6) of this section.

(2) Special rules. (i) A bank is not required to file a FinCEN Form 110 with respect to the
transfer of currency to or from:

(A) Any of the twelve Federal Reserve Banks; or

(B) Any exempt person as described in paragraphs (b)(1) to (3) of this section.

(ii) Notwithstanding subparagraphs (b)(6)(i) and (b)(7)(i) of this section, and if the
requirements under this section are otherwise satisfied, a bank may designate a non-listed
business or a payroll customer, as described in paragraphs (b)(6) and (7) of this section,
as an exempt person before the customer has maintained a transaction account at the bank for
at least two months if the bank conducts and documents a risk-based assessment of the
customer and forms a reasonable belief that the customer has a legitimate business purpose
for conducting frequent transactions in currency.

(d) Annual review. At least once each year, a bank must review the eligibility of an exempt
person described in paragraphs (b)(4) to (7) of this section to determine whether such
person remains eligible for an exemption. As part of its annual review, a bank must review
the application of the monitoring system required to be maintained by paragraph (h)(2) of
this section to each existing account of an exempt person described in paragraphs (b)(6) or
(b)(7) of this section.

(e) Operating rules—(1) General rule. Subject to the specific rules of this section, a bank
must take such steps to assure itself that a person is an exempt person (within the meaning
of the applicable provision of paragraph (b) of this section), to document the basis for its
conclusions, and document its compliance, with the terms of this section, that a reasonable
and prudent bank would take and document to protect itself from loan or other fraud or loss
based on misidentification of a person's status, and in the case of the monitoring system
requirement set forth in paragraph (h)(2) of this section, such steps that a reasonable and
prudent bank would take and document to identify suspicious transactions as required by
paragraph (h)(2) of this section.

(2) Governmental departments and agencies. A bank may treat a person as a governmental
department, agency, or entity if the name of such person reasonably indicates that it is
described in paragraph (b)(2) or (b)(3) of this section, or if such person is known
generally in the community to be a State, the District of Columbia, a tribal government, a
Territory or Insular Possession of the United States, or a political subdivision or a
wholly-owned agency or instrumentality of any of the foregoing. An entity generally
exercises governmental authority on behalf of the United States, a State, or a political
subdivision, for purposes of paragraph (b)(3) of this section, only if its authorities
include one or more of the powers to tax, to exercise the authority of eminent domain, or to
exercise police powers with respect to matters within its jurisdiction. Examples of entities
that exercise governmental authority include, but are not limited to, the New Jersey
Turnpike Authority and the Port Authority of New York and New Jersey.

(3) Stock exchange listings. In determining whether a person is described in paragraph
(b)(4) of this section, a bank may rely on any New York, American, or NASDAQ Stock Market
listing published in a newspaper of general circulation, on any commonly accepted or
published stock symbol guide, on any information contained in the Securities and Exchange
Commission “EDGAR” System, or on any information contained on an Internet site or sites
maintained by the New York Stock Exchange, the American Stock Exchange, or the NASDAQ.

(4) Listed company subsidiaries. In determining whether a person is described in paragraph
(b)(5) of this section, a bank may rely upon:

(i) Any reasonably authenticated corporate officer's certificate;

(ii) Any reasonably authenticated photocopy of Internal Revenue Service Form 851
(Affiliation Schedule) or the equivalent thereof for the appropriate tax year; or

(iii) A person's Annual Report or Form 10-K, as filed in each case with the Securities and
Exchange Commission.

(5) Aggregated accounts. In determining the qualification of a customer as a non-listed
business or a payroll customer, a bank may treat all exemptible accounts of the customer as
a single account. If a bank elects to treat all exemptible accounts of a customer as a
single account, the bank must continue to treat such accounts consistently as a single
account for purposes of determining the qualification of the customer as a non-listed
business or payroll customer.

(6) Affiliated banks. The designation required by paragraph (c) of this section may be made
by a parent bank holding company or one of its bank subsidiaries on behalf of all bank
subsidiaries of the holding company, so long as the designation lists each bank subsidiary
to which the designation shall apply.

(7) Sole proprietorships. A sole proprietorship may be treated as a non-listed business if
it otherwise meets the requirements of paragraph (b)(6) of this section, as applicable. In
addition, a sole proprietorship may be treated as a payroll customer if it otherwise meets
the requirements of paragraph (b)(7) of this section, as applicable.

(8) Ineligible businesses. A business engaged primarily in one or more of the following
activities may not be treated as a non-listed business for purposes of this section: Serving
as financial institutions or agents of financial institutions of any type; purchase or sale
to customers of motor vehicles of any kind, vessels, aircraft, farm equipment or mobile
homes; the practice of law, accountancy, or medicine; auctioning of goods; chartering or
operation of ships, buses, or aircraft; gaming of any kind (other than licensed parimutuel
betting at race tracks); investment advisory services or investment banking services; real
estate brokerage; pawn brokerage; title insurance and real estate closing; trade union
activities; and any other activities that may be specified by FinCEN. A business that
engages in multiple business activities may be treated as a non-listed business so long as
no more than 50% of its gross revenues are derived from one or more of the ineligible
business activities listed in this paragraph (e)(8).

(9) Exemptible accounts of a non-listed business or payroll customer. The exemptible
accounts of a non-listed business or payroll customer include transaction accounts and money
market deposit accounts. However, money market deposit accounts maintained other than in
connection with a commercial enterprise are not exemptible accounts. A transaction account,
for purposes of this section, is any account described in section 19(b)(1)(C) of the Federal
Reserve Act, 12 U.S.C. 461(b)(1)(C), and its implementing regulations (12 CFR part 204). A
money market deposit account, for purposes of this section, is any interest-bearing account
that is described as a money market deposit account in 12 CFR 204.2(d)(2).

(10) Documentation. The records maintained by a bank to document its compliance with and
administration of the rules of this section shall be maintained in accordance with the
provisions of § 1010.430.

(f) Limitation on exemption. A transaction carried out by an exempt person as an agent for
another person who is the beneficial owner of the funds that are the subject of a
transaction in currency is not subject to the exemption from reporting contained in
paragraph (a) of this section.

(g) Limitation on liability. (1) No bank shall be subject to penalty under this chapter for
failure to file a report required by § 1010.311 with respect to a transaction in currency by
an exempt person with respect to which the requirements of this section have been satisfied,
unless the bank:

(i) Knowingly files false or incomplete information with respect to the transaction or the
customer engaging in the transaction; or

(ii) Has reason to believe that the customer does not meet the criteria established by this
section for treatment of the transactor as an exempt person or that the transaction is not a
transaction of the exempt person.

(2) Subject to the specific terms of this section, and absent any specific knowledge of
information indicating that a customer no longer meets the requirements of an exempt person,
a bank satisfies the requirements of this section to the extent it continues to treat that
customer as an exempt person until the completion of that customer's next required periodic
review, which as required by paragraph (d) of this section for an exempt person described in
paragraph (b)(4) to (7) of this section, shall occur no less than once each year.

(3) A bank that files a report with respect to a currency transaction by an exempt person
rather than treating such person as exempt shall remain subject, with respect to each such
report, to the rules for filing reports, and the penalties for filing false or incomplete
reports that are applicable to reporting of transactions in currency by persons other than
exempt persons.

(h) Obligations to file suspicious activity reports and maintain system for monitoring
transactions in currency. (1) Nothing in this section relieves a bank of the obligation, or
reduces in any way such bank's obligation, to file a report required by § 1020.320 with
respect to any transaction, including any transaction in currency that a bank knows,
suspects, or has reason to suspect is a transaction or attempted transaction that is
described in § 1020.320(a)(2)(i), (ii), or (iii), or relieves a bank of any reporting or
recordkeeping obligation imposed by this chapter (except the obligation to report
transactions in currency pursuant to this chapter to the extent provided in this section).
Thus, for example, a sharp increase from one year to the next in the gross total of currency
transactions made by an exempt customer, or similarly anomalous transactions trends or
patterns, may trigger the obligation of a bank under § 1020.320.

(2) Consistent with its annual review obligations under paragraph (d) of this section, a
bank shall establish and maintain a monitoring system that is reasonably designed to detect,
for each account of a non-listed business or payroll customer, those transactions in
currency involving such account that would require a bank to file a suspicious transaction
report. The statement in the preceding sentence with respect to accounts of non-listed
business and payroll customers does not limit the obligation of banks generally to take the
steps necessary to satisfy the terms of paragraph (h)(1) of this section and § 1020.320 with
respect to all exempt persons.

(i) Revocation. Without any action on the part of the Department of the Treasury and subject
to the limitation on liability contained in paragraph (g)(2) of this section:

(1) The status of an entity as an exempt person under paragraph (b)(4) of this section
ceases once such entity ceases to be listed on the applicable stock exchange; and

(2) The status of a subsidiary as an exempt person under paragraph (b)(5) of this section
ceases once such subsidiary ceases to have at least 51 per cent of its common stock or
analogous equity interest owned by a listed entity.


----------------------------------------------------------------------


§ 1020.320 Reports by banks of suspicious transactions.
-------------------------------------------------------

(a) General. (1) Every bank shall file with the Treasury Department, to the extent and in
the manner required by this section, a report of any suspicious transaction relevant to a
possible violation of law or regulation. A bank may also file with the Treasury Department
by using the Suspicious Activity Report specified in paragraph (b)(1) of this section or
otherwise, a report of any suspicious transaction that it believes is relevant to the
possible violation of any law or regulation but whose reporting is not required by this
section.

(2) A transaction requires reporting under the terms of this section if it is conducted or
attempted by, at, or through the bank, it involves or aggregates at least $5,000 in funds or
other assets, and the bank knows, suspects, or has reason to suspect that:

(i) The transaction involves funds derived from illegal activities or is intended or
conducted in order to hide or disguise funds or assets derived from illegal activities
(including, without limitation, the ownership, nature, source, location, or control of such
funds or assets) as part of a plan to violate or evade any Federal law or regulation or to
avoid any transaction reporting requirement under Federal law or regulation;

(ii) The transaction is designed to evade any requirements of this chapter or of any other
regulations promulgated under the Bank Secrecy Act; or

(iii) The transaction has no business or apparent lawful purpose or is not the sort in which
the particular customer would normally be expected to engage, and the bank knows of no
reasonable explanation for the transaction after examining the available facts, including
the background and possible purpose of the transaction.

(b) Filing procedures—(1) What to file. A suspicious transaction shall be reported by
completing a Suspicious Activity Report (“SAR”), and collecting and maintaining supporting
documentation as required by paragraph (d) of this section.

(2) Where to file. The SAR shall be filed with FinCEN in a central location, to be
determined by FinCEN, as indicated in the instructions to the SAR.

(3) When to file. A bank is required to file a SAR no later than 30 calendar days after the
date of initial detection by the bank of facts that may constitute a basis for filing a SAR.
If no suspect was identified on the date of the detection of the incident requiring the
filing, a bank may delay filing a SAR for an additional 30 calendar days to identify a
suspect. In no case shall reporting be delayed more than 60 calendar days after the date of
initial detection of a reportable transaction. In situations involving violations that
require immediate attention, such as, for example, ongoing money laundering schemes, the
bank shall immediately notify, by telephone, an appropriate law enforcement authority in
addition to filing timely a SAR.

(c) Exceptions. A bank is not required to file a SAR for a robbery or burglary committed or
attempted that is reported to appropriate law enforcement authorities, or for lost, missing,
counterfeit, or stolen securities with respect to which the bank files a report pursuant to
the reporting requirements of 17 CFR 240.17f-1.

(d) Retention of records. A bank shall maintain a copy of any SAR filed and the original or
business record equivalent of any supporting documentation for a period of five years from
the date of filing the SAR. Supporting documentation shall be identified, and maintained by
the bank as such, and shall be deemed to have been filed with the SAR. A bank shall make all
supporting documentation available to FinCEN or any Federal, State, or local law enforcement
agency, or any Federal regulatory authority that examines the bank for compliance with the
Bank Secrecy Act, or any State regulatory authority administering a State law that requires
the bank to comply with the Bank Secrecy Act or otherwise authorizes the State authority to
ensure that the institution complies with the Bank Secrecy Act, upon request.

(e) Confidentiality of SARs. A SAR, and any information that would reveal the existence of a
SAR, are confidential and shall not be disclosed except as authorized in this paragraph (e).
For purposes of this paragraph (e) only, a SAR shall include any suspicious activity report
filed with FinCEN pursuant to any regulation in this chapter.

(1) Prohibition on disclosures by banks—(i) General rule. No bank, and no director, officer,
employee, or agent of any bank, shall disclose a SAR or any information that would reveal
the existence of a SAR. Any bank, and any director, officer, employee, or agent of any bank
that is subpoenaed or otherwise requested to disclose a SAR or any information that would
reveal the existence of a SAR, shall decline to produce the SAR or such information, citing
this section and 31 U.S.C. 5318(g)(2)(A)(i), and shall notify FinCEN of any such request and
the response thereto.

(ii) Rules of Construction. Provided that no person involved in any reported suspicious
transaction is notified that the transaction has been reported, this paragraph (e)(1) shall
not be construed as prohibiting:

(A) The disclosure by a bank, or any director, officer, employee, or agent of a bank, of:

(1) A SAR, or any information that would reveal the existence of a SAR, to FinCEN or any
Federal, State, or local law enforcement agency, or any Federal regulatory authority that
examines the bank for compliance with the Bank Secrecy Act, or any State regulatory
authority administering a State law that requires the bank to comply with the Bank Secrecy
Act or otherwise authorizes the State authority to ensure that the bank complies with the
Bank Secrecy Act; or

(2) The underlying facts, transactions, and documents upon which a SAR is based, including
but not limited to, disclosures:

(i) To another financial institution, or any director, officer, employee, or agent of a
financial institution, for the preparation of a joint SAR; or

(ii) In connection with certain employment references or termination notices, to the full
extent authorized in 31 U.S.C. 5318(g)(2)(B); or

(B) The sharing by a bank, or any director, officer, employee, or agent of the bank, of a
SAR, or any information that would reveal the existence of a SAR, within the bank's
corporate organizational structure for purposes consistent with Title II of the Bank Secrecy
Act as determined by regulation or in guidance.

(2) Prohibition on disclosures by government authorities. A Federal, State, local,
territorial, or Tribal government authority, or any director, officer, employee, or agent of
any of the foregoing, shall not disclose a SAR, or any information that would reveal the
existence of a SAR, except as necessary to fulfill official duties consistent with Title II
of the Bank Secrecy Act. For purposes of this section, “official duties” shall not include
the disclosure of a SAR, or any information that would reveal the existence of a SAR, in
response to a request for disclosure of non-public information or a request for use in a
private legal proceeding, including a request pursuant to 31 CFR 1.11.

(f) Limitation on liability. A bank, and any director, officer, employee, or agent of any
bank, that makes a voluntary disclosure of any possible violation of law or regulation to a
government agency or makes a disclosure pursuant to this section or any other authority,
including a disclosure made jointly with another institution, shall be protected from
liability to any person for any such disclosure, or for failure to provide notice of such
disclosure to any person identified in the disclosure, or both, to the full extent provided
by 31 U.S.C. 5318(g)(3).

(g) Compliance. Banks shall be examined by FinCEN or its delegatees for compliance with this
section. Failure to satisfy the requirements of this section may be a violation of the Bank
Secrecy Act and of this chapter. Such failure may also violate provisions of title 12 of the
Code of Federal Regulations.
