
--- page 1 ---
OMB No. 1506-0012
Part I      Exempt Person
Designation of Exempt Person
Please type or print
3  Business Name or Name of Sole Proprietor 4  Doing Business As (DBA)
5  Address (Number, Street, and Apt. or Suite No.)
7  State 8  Zip/Postal Code 9  Taxpayer Identification Number
TD F 90-22.53
Treasury form
(January 1999)
1  Check appropriate box (see instructions):
    a Initial Designation Biennial Renewalb
6  City
Part II     Basis for Exemption
10 Exemption Basis
Listed companyc Listed Company SubsidiarydBanka Government Agency / Governmental  Authorityb
Eligible Non-listed businesse
2  Check appropriate box
Exemption Amendeda Exemption Revokedb
Payroll Customerf
11 Effective date of the exemption
M        M       D       D      Y      Y       Y       Y
15  Address (Number, Street, and Apt. or Suite No.)
16  City
Bank Granting or Revoking ExemptionPart III
13 Name of Bank 14 Primary Federal Regulator  (check only one)
17 State 18  Zip/Postal Code 19 Taxpayer Identification Number
20 Title of approving official 21 Signature of approving official 22 Date of Signature
M        M       D       D      Y      Y       Y       Y
23 Last name of person to contact 24 First name of person to contact
( ) -
25 Telephone number
Sign
Here
26 For Biennial Updates ONLY  (see item 1(b))
I certify on behalf of the above listed bank that its system of monitoring the transactions in currency of an exempt person for  suspicious activity has
been applied as necessary, and at least annually, to the account of this exempt person.
                             Signature of Approving Official
OCCa FDICb FRSc OTSd NCUAe
Sign
Here
Paperwork Reduction Act Notice:  The purpose of this form is to provide an effective means for banks and depository institutions to exempt eligible customers from currency transaction
reporting.  This report is required by law, pursuant to 31 CFR 103.22. Federal law enforcement and regulatory agencies, includi ng the U.S. Department the Treasury and other authorized
authorities may use and share this information.  You are not required to provide the requested information unless a form displa ys a valid OMB control number. Public reporting and  recordkeeping
burden for this form is estimated to average 70 minutes per response, and includes time to gather and maintain information the required report, review the instructions, and  complete the
information collection.  The record retention period is five years.  Send comments regarding this burden estimate, including su ggestions for reducing the burden, to the Financial Crimes
Enforcement Network, Attn: Paperwork Reduction Act; Suite 200; 2070 Chain Bridge Road, Vienna VA 22182-2536
Cat. No. 26697V
This form must be used by a bank or other depository institution to designate an eligible customer as an exempt person from cur rency transaction
reporting rules of the Department of the Treasury (31 CFR 103.22). File this form with:
U.S. Department of  the Treasury, P.O. Box 33112, Detroit, MI 48232-0112.
12 Has there been a change in control of the
exempt person? For 10(e) and (f) only.
a Yes b No
--- page 2 ---
2INSTRUCTIONS
General Instructions
Who Must File this Report:   Any bank (see definition) that wishes to
designate a customer as an exempt person for purposes of CTR
reporting must file this report.  31 CFR 103.22(d)(3)(i)
In addition, banks must file this form for the biennial renewal of the
exempt person designation of eligible non-listed businesses and payroll
customers.  31 CFR 103.22(d)(5)
A bank may, but is not required to, use this form to notify the Treasury
that the bank has revoked the designation of a customer as an exempt
person.
For further information, please refer to Title 31 of the Code of Federal
Regulations, Part 103.  See 31 CFR 103.11 for many definitions, and
31 CFR 103.22(d) for information on exemptions to CTR reporting.
When and Where to File -This report must be filed with the U.S.
Department of the Treasury: Designation at P.O. Box 33112, Detroit MI
48232-0112.  The report must be filed no later than  30 days after the
first transaction to be exempted.
Biennial Renewal (for eligible non-listed businesses and payroll
customers only):  The report must be filed by March 15 of the second
calendar year following the year in which the initial designation is made,
and by every other March 15 thereafter.
General Definitions
Bank:  A domestic bank, savings association, thrift institution, or credit
union.   See 31 CFR 103.11(c).  These may be exempted only to the
extent of their domestic (i.e. US) operations.
Biennial Renewal: As provided for by 31 CFR 103.22(d)(5)(ii), the
exemption status of all eligible non-listed businesses or payroll
customers (see Item 10 e and f) must be updated once every two years,
by March 15.  This update is a biennial renewal of the exemption for
these customers.
Government Agency / Governmental Authority:  A department or
agency of the United States, a State, or a political subdivision of a
State, or (2) an entity established under the laws of the United States,
of any State, or political subdivision of a State, or under interstate
compact between 2 or more States, exercising governmental authority
(i.e. the power to tax, police powers, or the power of eminent domain).
Listed Company:  A business, other than a bank, whose common
stock or analogous equity interests are listed on the New York Stock
Exchange, the American Stock Exchange, or the National Association
of Securities Dealers Automated Quotation System - National Market
System.
See 31 CFR 103.22(d)(2) for the extent to which listed companies that
are financial institutions may be exempted.
Listed Company Subsidiary:  A subsidiary, other than a bank, which
is owned at least 51%, and is controlled, by a Listed Company.
See 31 CFR 103.22(d)(2)  for the extent to which listed companies
subsidiaries that are financial institutions may be exempted.
Eligible Non-Listed business:  A business which (1) has had a
transaction account at the bank for at least 12 months; (2) frequently
engages in currency transactions greater than $10,000; (3) is
incorporated, or organized under the laws of the United States or a
State, or is registered as and eligible to do business in the United
States; and (4) is not an ineligible business.
Eligible non-listed businesses may be exempted only to the extent of
their domestic (i.e. US) operations.
Payroll Customers:  A business which (1) has had a transaction
account at the bank for at least 12 months; (2) frequently withdraws
more than $10,000 in currency for payroll purposes in order to pay its
employees in the US; (3) is incorporated or organized under the laws
of the United States or a State, or is registered as and eligible to do
business in the United States.
Ineligible Businesses:  A business engaged primarily in one or
more of the following activities: serving as financial institutions or
agents of financial institutions of any type; purchase or sale to
customers of motor vehicles of any kind, vessels, aircraft, farm
equipment or mobile homes; the practice of law, accountancy, or
medicine; auctioning of goods; chartering or operation of ships,
buses, or aircraft; gaming of any kind (other than licensed pari-mutuel
betting at race tracks); investment advisory services or investment
banking services; real estate brokerage; pawn brokerage; title
insurance and real estate closing; trade union activities; and any
other activities that may be specified by FinCEN.
A business that engages in multiple business activities is not an
ineligible business as long as no more than 50% of its gross
revenues is derived from one or more ineligible business activities.
United States:  The States of the United States, the District of
Columbia, the Indian lands (as defined in the Indian Gaming
Regulatory Act), and the Territories and Insular Possessions of the
United States.
EXPLANATIONS FOR SPECIFIC ITEMS
Item 3 - Business Name or Last Name of Sole Proprietor:  List the
full legal name of the business being exempted, or the complete last
name of the person being exempted.
Item 9 - Taxpayer Identification Number:  Generally, the Employer
Identification Number of the Exempt Person.
Item 14 - Primary Federal Regulator:  OCC = Office of the
Comptroller of the Currency; OTS = Office of Thrift Supervision; FRS
= Federal Reserve System; FDIC = Federal Deposit Insurance
Corporation; NCUA = National Credit Union Administration.
Item 23, 24, 25 - Contact:   The last and first name, and the
telephone number of the person within the depository institution to be
contacted for questions regarding this report.
--- page 3 ---
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Financial Crimes Enforcement Network 
FinCEN Designation of Exempt Person 
(FinCEN 110) Electronic Filing Instructions
 
Release Date October 2012 – Version 1.0 
--- page 4 ---
  Financial Crimes Enforcement Network 
BSA Electronic Filing Requirements for the Designation of Exempt Person (FinCEN Form 110) 
report 
27 
FinCEN DOEP Electronic Filing Instructions 
 
T
he following instructions apply only to the electronic filing of the Designation of Exempt 
Person (DOEP) report, FinCEN Form 110, through FinCEN’s BSA E-Filing System. These 
instructions do not apply to any other current or prior Bank Secrecy Act reports.  
 
General Information 
 
The Bank Secrecy Act and its implementing regulations require banks to file currency 
transaction reports on transactions in currency of more than $10,000. The regulations also 
permit a bank to exempt certain customers from currency transaction reporting in accordance 
with 31 CFR 1020.315. 
 
Banks are the only type of financial institutions that may exempt customers from CTR 
filing requirements. The term bank is defined in 31CFR 1010.100(d); and includes savings and 
loan associations, thrift institutions, and credit unions. 
 
The customers that the bank may exempt are called “exempt persons.” An exempt 
person may be a bank, government agency/government authority, listed company, listed 
company subsidiary, eligible non-listed business, or payroll customer. 
 
A bank may, but is not required to, use this report to notify the Treasury that the bank 
has revoked the designation of a customer as an exempt person. 
 
FinCEN encourages banks to use the exemption procedure to the fullest extent. FinCEN 
reminds banks of their continuing obligation to monitor for and report suspicious activity with 
respect to transactions of all customers, including currency transactions conducted by exempt 
persons. 
 
General Instructions 
 
1. Filing: The DOEP should be e-filed through the BSA E-Filing System. Go to 
h
ttp://bsaefiling.fincen.treas.gov/index.jsp to register. Any bank that wishes to designate a 
customer as an exempt person must file the DOEP no later than 30 days after the first 
transaction to be exempted. 
 
2. Report Completion. Complete the report in accordance with instructions for each 
item. Unless there is a specific instruction to the contrary, leave blank any items that do not 
apply. 
 
--- page 5 ---
  Financial Crimes Enforcement Network 
BSA Electronic Filing Requirements for the Designation of Exempt Person (FinCEN Form 110) 
report 
28 
3.  Dates. Enter all dates in MM/DD/ YYYY format where MM = month, DD = day, and 
YYYY = year. Precede any single number with a zero, i.e., 01, 02, etc. 
 
4.  Numbers. Enter all numbers such at identifying and telephone numbers as single 
number strings without formatting or punctuation such as spaces, hyphens, or parenthesis. 
 
  5.  Addresses. Enter the permanent street address, city, two-letter state or territory 
abbreviation, and ZIP Code. Provide the apartment number or suite number, if known, 
following the street address. A non-location address such as a post office box or rural route 
number should be used only if no other street address information is available. ZIP Codes must 
be five or nine digits. ZIP Codes must be entered without formatting or special characters such 
as hyphens. For example, the ZIP Code 12354-6120 would be entered as 123546120. Complete 
any address item that is known, even if the entire address is unknown. No abbreviations are 
permitted in city names, which must be completely spelled out. A U.S. city name should match 
the city name used by the U.S. Postal Service for the associated state and ZIP Code. Use only the 
authorized U.S. Postal Service state, territory, or military address abbreviations found at 
https://www.usps.com/ship/official-abbreviations.htm
.  Foreign batch filers who are completing 
the Transmitter (1A) Record with foreign address information must use only the Canadian and 
Mexican state/territory/province codes and ISO country codes approved for use by FinCEN. For 
Canadian provinces and territories use the Canada Post Corporation codes found at 
http://www.canadapost.ca/tools/pg/manual/PGaddress-e.asp#1380608.  For Mexican states and 
territories use the ISO 3166-2 three-letter codes found at 
http://www.commondatahub.com/live/geography/state_province_region/iso_3166_2_state_code
s.  For all countries use the ISO 3166-1 two-letter country codes found at 
http://www.iso.org/iso/country_names_and_code_elements. Note:  The ISO 3166-1 country list 
includes entries for all U.S. territories.  Do not use these U.S. territory entries, which match the 
U.S. Postal Service abbreviations required in state fields, in any country field. 
 
6.  Prohibited Words. Do not use the following words or their variations in fields:  
 
a) AKA 
b) CUSTOMER 
c) DBA 
d) NONE 
e) NOT APPLICABLE 
f) OTHER 
g) SAME 
h) SAME AS ABOVE 
i) SEE ABOVE 
j) UNKNOWN 
k) VARIOUS 
l) XX 
--- page 6 ---
  Financial Crimes Enforcement Network 
BSA Electronic Filing Requirements for the Designation of Exempt Person (FinCEN Form 110) 
report 
29 
  7.  Name Editing Instructions.  Because many names do not consist of a single first 
name, middle name, and last name, care must be taken to ensure these names are entered 
properly in the BSA SAR. This is especially important when there are separate fields for the last 
name, first name, and middle name. Some names have multiple surnames (family names) or 
multiple given names that do not include a middle name. Others may not be written in [first 
name] [middle name] [last name] order. Multiple surnames must be entered in the last name 
field. For example, Hispanic names may be written in the order of given name, father's last 
name, and mother's last name, e.g., “Juan Vega Santiago.” 
 Thus the surname “VEGA 
SANTIAGO” would be entered in the last name field with “JUAN” entered in the first name 
field. Some Hispanic surnames consist of three names (e.g., father’s last name, mother’s last 
name, and husband’s father’s last name in the case of a married woman). 
 In that case all three 
would be entered in a last name field. Hispanic names do not have middle names, so a multiple 
Hispanic given name such as “Rosa Maria” would be recorded in the first name field. In some 
cultures names consist of multiple first names and a single family name, not necessarily in (first 
name) (last name) order. For example, the Korean name “Kim, Chun Nam” consists of the 
family name “Kim” and the first name “Chun Nam” separated by a comma and space. There is 
no middle name. In this case “KIM” would be entered in the last name field and “CHUN 
NAM” would be entered in the first name field. Nothing is entered in the middle name field. 
When an individual name is entered in a single name field it should be entered in [first name] 
[middle name] [last name] order regardless of any foreign naming conventions. Thus, “Kim, 
Chun Nam” would be entered as “CHUN NAM KIM” in a single name field. Punctuation and 
special characters should be used in names only when they are part of the name.  For example, 
the period in “Expedia.Com” should be included because it is part of the name.  
Placing a 
period after a middle initial would be prohibited because the period is not part of the middle 
name. Abbreviations in names are prohibited unless an abbreviation is part of a legal 
name.  Entry of middle initials is permitted when a middle name is unknown.  A name suffix 
may be abbreviated, i.e. Junior can be JR, Senior can be SR, the Third can be III, etc. 
 
Specific Instructions 
 
Part I Filing Information 
 
Item 1--Type of filing. Check only one of the three boxes 1a “Initial designation,” 1b 
“Exemption amended,” or 1c “Exemption revoked.” 
If the DOEP amends or revokes a prior 
designation, include the Document Control Number or BSA Identifier of the prior filing in the 
associated number field.  If this number is unknown, enter “00000000000000” in the number 
field.  Leave the number field blank if the filing is an initial designation. 
 
Item 2--Effective date of the exemption. For an initial designation, enter the date of the first 
transaction to be exempted.  For amended DOEPs, if the effective date of the exemption is not 
being amended, the date entered should be the same date the bank used in the “effective date of 
the exemption box” when the initial designation was made.  If the effective date of the 
--- page 7 ---
  Financial Crimes Enforcement Network 
BSA Electronic Filing Requirements for the Designation of Exempt Person (FinCEN Form 110) 
report 
30 
exemption is being amended, enter the revised date of the first transaction to be exempted. If an 
exemption is being revoked, enter the day after the date of the last transaction that was 
exempted. 
 
Part II Exempt Person Information 
  
Check here if entity.  Check this box if the exempt person is an entity.  Leave this box blank 
if the exempt person is an individual. 
 
Item 3—Individual’s last name or entity’s legal name of the exempt person. If the exempt 
person is an entity, enter the full legal name of the exempt person as it is shown on the charter 
or other document creating the entity. For exempt individuals such as sole proprietorships, 
enter individual’s last name. 
 
Item 4—First name. Enter the first name of the exempt person if an individual. 
 
Item 5—Middle name. Enter the middle name or initial of the exempt person if an individual. 
 
Item 5—Suffix. Enter the name suffix such as JR, SR, III, etc. of the exempt person if an 
individual. 
 
Item 6—Alternate name. Enter the individual’s also known as (AKA) or the entity’s doing 
business as (DBA) name if different from the name entered in Items 3-5.  Do not include the 
acronyms AKA or DBA with the name. 
 
Item 7—Occupation or type of business. Record the occupation, profession, or type of business 
of the exempt person.  Use specific descriptions such as doctor, carpenter, attorney, used car 
dealership, plumber, truck driver, hardware store, etc.  Do not use non-descriptive occupations 
such as businessman, merchant, retailer, or self-employed without indicating the nature of the 
occupations, e.g.  shoe merchant or self-employed accountant. 
 
Item 7a—NAICS Code. Select the North American Industry Classification System (NAICS) 
code for the occupation entered in Item 7.  Batch filers should only use codes from the NAICS 
Code list on 
the BSA E-Filing Web Site at http://bsaefiling.fincen.treas.gov/main.html. 
 
Item 8—Address. Enter the permanent street address of the business location of the exempt 
person.  For exempt persons doing business at more than one physical location, enter the local 
headquarters address or local address of the exempt person.  For individuals such as sole 
proprietorships, enter the business address of the individual rather than the home address, 
unless they are the same. 
 
--- page 8 ---
  Financial Crimes Enforcement Network 
BSA Electronic Filing Requirements for the Designation of Exempt Person (FinCEN Form 110) 
report 
31 
Item 9—City. Enter the city associated with the business location of the exempt person.  Do not 
abbreviate the city name (see General Instruction 5).  
 
Item 10—State. Select the state or territory associated with the business location of the exempt 
person.  
 
Item 11—ZIP Code. Enter the ZIP Code associated with the business location of the exempt 
person.  Use only the five or nine-digit ZIP Code assigned to the address by the U.S. Postal 
Service. 
 
Item 12—TIN. Enter the Employer Identification Number (EIN) or Social Security Number 
(SSN) of the exempt person. If a sole proprietorship does not have an EIN, enter the proprietor’s 
Social Security Number (SSN). 
 
Item 13—TIN type. Select the TIN type associated with the TIN in Item 12. 
 
Item 14—E-mail address. Enter the e-mail address associated with the exempt person. 
 
Item 15—Phone number. Enter the telephone number of the exempt person.  Enter as a single 
number string without formatting and punctuation such as spaces, hyphens, or parenthesis. 
 
Item 15a—Extension. Enter the telephone number extension of the exempt person. 
 
Item 16—Type of exempt person. Check only one of the four boxes 16a “Listed company,” 16b 
“Listed company subsidiary, 16c “Eligible non-listed business, or 16d “Payroll customer.” 
 
Part III Filer Information 
 
Item 17—Name of bank. Enter the bank’s full legal 
name. 
 
Item 18—EIN. 
Enter the bank’s Employer Identification Number (EIN). 
 
Item 19—RSSD. Enter the bank’s Research Statistics Supervision Discount (RSSD) number. 
 
Items 20 - 23—Address. Enter the bank’s headquarters address. 
 
Item 24—Primary federal regulator. Select the bank’s primary federal regulator from the list.
  
The options are: 
 
  Federal Reserve Board (FRB) 
  Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation (FDIC) 
  Internal Revenue Service (IRS) 
--- page 9 ---
  Financial Crimes Enforcement Network 
BSA Electronic Filing Requirements for the Designation of Exempt Person (FinCEN Form 110) 
report 
32 
  National Credit Union Administration (NCUA) 
  Office of the Comptroller of the Currency (OCC) 
 
Item 25—Affiliated banks. A parent bank holding company or one of its bank subsidiaries may 
make the designation of exempt person on behalf of some or all bank subsidiaries of the holding 
company so long as the designation lists each bank subsidiary that will treat the customer as an 
exempt person. Check the box in Item 25 and complete an Affiliated Bank Information section 
on each affiliated bank. Batch filers will complete an Affiliated Bank Information (2B) Record on 
each affiliated bank. 
 
Part IV Signature 
 
Item 26—Print name. Enter the name of the bank official who authorized the exemption. 
 
Item 27—Title. Enter the title of the bank official who authorized the exemption. 
 
Item 28—Signature. This report is signed when the discrete report or batch file is signed with a 
personal identification number (PIN) assigned to an appropriate bank official by the BSA E-
Filing System. 
 
Item 29—Phone number. Enter the telephone number of the bank official who authorized the 
exemption. 
 
Item 29a—Extension. Enter the telephone number extension of the bank official who authorized 
the exemption. 
 
 
Item 30—Date of signature. If the DOEP is a discrete filing, this date will be supplied by the 
BSA E-Filing System when the report is signed with a PIN.  Batch filers should enter the 
signature date in the 3A record.   
 
Paperwork Reduction Act Notice: The purpose of this report is to provide an effective means 
for banks and depository institutions to exempt eligible customers from currency transaction 
reporting. This report is required by law, pursuant to 31 CFR 1020.315 Federal law enforcement 
and regulatory agencies, including the U.S. Department of Treasury and other authorized 
authorities, may use and share this information. You are not required to provide the requested 
information unless a report displays a valid OMB control number. Public reporting and 
recordkeeping burden for this report is estimated to average 70 minutes per response, and 
includes time to gather and maintain information for the required report, review the 
instructions, and complete the information collection. The record retention period is five years. 
Send comments regarding this burden estimate, including suggestions for reducing the burden, 
to Financial Crimes Enforcement Network, Attention: Paperwork Reduction Act, P. O. Box 39, 
Vienna, VA 22183-0039. 