
--- page 1 ---
29398 Federal Register / Vol. 81, No. 91 / Wednesday, May 11, 2016 / Rules and Regulations 
1 31 U.S.C. 5318(h)(2). 
2 31 U.S.C. 5318(a)(2). 
3 The term ‘‘covered financial institution’’ refers 
to: (i) Banks; (ii) brokers or dealers in securities; (iii) 
mutual funds; and (iv) futures commission 
merchants and introducing brokers in commodities. 
4 31 CFR 1020.220, 1023.220, 1024.220, 1026.220. 
DEPARTMENT OF THE TREASURY 
Financial Crimes Enforcement Network 
31 CFR Parts 1010, 1020, 1023, 1024, 
and 1026 
RIN 1506–AB25 
Customer Due Diligence Requirements 
for Financial Institutions 
AGENCY: Financial Crimes Enforcement 
Network (FinCEN), Treasury. 
ACTION: Final rules. 
SUMMARY: FinCEN is issuing final rules 
under the Bank Secrecy Act to clarify 
and strengthen customer due diligence 
requirements for: Banks; brokers or 
dealers in securities; mutual funds; and 
futures commission merchants and 
introducing brokers in commodities. 
The rules contain explicit customer due 
diligence requirements and include a 
new requirement to identify and verify 
the identity of beneficial owners of legal 
entity customers, subject to certain 
exclusions and exemptions. 
DATES: The final rules are effective July 
11, 2016. 
Applicability Date: Covered financial 
institutions must comply with these 
rules by May 11, 2018. 
FOR FURTHER INFORMATION CONTACT : 
FinCEN Resource Center at 1–800–767– 
2825. Email inquiries can be sent to frc@
fincen.gov. 
SUPPLEMENTARY INFORMATION: 
I. Executive Summary 
A. Purpose of This Regulatory Action 
Covered financial institutions are not 
presently required to know the identity 
of the individuals who own or control 
their legal entity customers (also known 
as beneficial owners). This enables 
criminals, kleptocrats, and others 
looking to hide ill-gotten proceeds to 
access the financial system 
anonymously. The beneficial ownership 
requirement will address this weakness 
and provide information that will assist 
law enforcement in financial 
investigations, help prevent evasion of 
targeted financial sanctions, improve 
the ability of financial institutions to 
assess risk, facilitate tax compliance, 
and advance U.S. compliance with 
international standards and 
commitments. 
FinCEN believes that there are four 
core elements of customer due diligence 
(CDD), and that they should be explicit 
requirements in the anti-money 
laundering (AML) program for all 
covered financial institutions, in order 
to ensure clarity and consistency across 
sectors: (1) Customer identification and 
verification, (2) beneficial ownership 
identification and verification, (3) 
understanding the nature and purpose 
of customer relationships to develop a 
customer risk profile, and (4) ongoing 
monitoring for reporting suspicious 
transactions and, on a risk-basis, 
maintaining and updating customer 
information. The first is already an AML 
program requirement and the second 
will be required by this final rule. The 
third and fourth elements are already 
implicitly required for covered financial 
institutions to comply with their 
suspicious activity reporting 
requirements. The AML program rules 
for all covered financial institutions are 
being amended by the final rule in order 
to include the third and fourth elements 
as explicit requirements. 
FinCEN has the legal authority for this 
action in the Bank Secrecy Act (BSA), 
which authorizes FinCEN to impose 
AML program requirements on all 
financial institutions
1 and to require 
financial institutions to maintain 
procedures to ensure compliance with 
the BSA and its implementing 
regulations or to guard against money 
laundering.
2 
B. Summary of the Major Provisions of 
the Rulemaking 
1. Beneficial Ownership 
Beginning on the Applicability Date, 
covered financial institutions
3 must 
identify and verify the identity of the 
beneficial owners of all legal entity 
customers (other than those that are 
excluded) at the time a new account is 
opened (other than accounts that are 
exempted). The financial institution 
may comply either by obtaining the 
required information on a standard 
certification form (Certification Form 
(Appendix A)) or by any other means 
that comply with the substantive 
requirements of this obligation. The 
financial institution may rely on the 
beneficial ownership information 
supplied by the customer, provided that 
it has no knowledge of facts that would 
reasonably call into question the 
reliability of the information. The 
identification and verification 
procedures for beneficial owners are 
very similar to those for individual 
customers under a financial institution’s 
customer identification program (CIP),
4 
except that for beneficial owners, the 
institution may rely on copies of 
identity documents. Financial 
institutions are required to maintain 
records of the beneficial ownership 
information they obtain, and may rely 
on another financial institution for the 
performance of these requirements, in 
each case to the same extent as under 
their CIP rule. 
The terms used for the purposes of 
this final rule, including account, 
beneficial ownership, legal entity 
customer, excluded legal entities, new 
account, and covered financial 
institution, are set forth in the final rule. 
Financial institutions should use 
beneficial ownership information as 
they use other information they gather 
regarding customers (e.g., through 
compliance with CIP requirements), 
including for compliance with the 
Office of Foreign Assets Control (OFAC) 
regulations, and the currency 
transaction reporting (CTR) aggregation 
requirements. 
2. Anti-Money Laundering Program 
Rule Amendments 
The AML program requirement for 
each category of covered financial 
institutions is being amended to 
explicitly include risk-based procedures 
for conducting ongoing customer due 
diligence, to include understanding the 
nature and purpose of customer 
relationships for the purpose of 
developing a customer risk profile. 
A customer risk profile refers to the 
information gathered about a customer 
at account opening used to develop a 
baseline against which customer activity 
is assessed for suspicious activity 
reporting. This may include self-evident 
information such as the type of 
customer or type of account, service, or 
product. The profile may, but need not, 
include a system of risk ratings or 
categories of customers. 
In addition, customer due diligence 
also includes conducting ongoing 
monitoring to identify and report 
suspicious transactions and, on a risk 
basis, to maintain and update customer 
information. For these purposes, 
customer information shall include 
information regarding the beneficial 
owners of legal entity customers (as 
defined in § 1010.230). The first clause 
of paragraph (ii) sets forth the 
requirement that financial institutions 
conduct monitoring to identify and 
report suspicious transactions. Because 
this includes transactions that are not of 
the sort the customer would be normally 
expected to engage, the customer risk 
profile information is used (among other 
sources) to identify such transactions. 
This information may be integrated into 
the financial institution’s automated 
monitoring system, and may be used 
VerDate Sep<11>2014 18:50 May 10, 2016 Jkt 238001 PO 00000 Frm 00002 Fmt 4701 Sfmt 4700 E:\FR\FM\11MYR3.SGM 11MYR3mstockstill on DSK3G9T082PROD with RULES3
--- page 2 ---
29399 Federal Register / Vol. 81, No. 91 / Wednesday, May 11, 2016 / Rules and Regulations 
5 In the final RIA, we estimate that 10-year 
quantifiable costs range from $1.15 billion to $2.15 
billion in present value using a seven percent 
discount rate, and from $1.3 billion to $2.5 billion 
using a three percent discount rate. 
6 The BSA is codified at 12 U.S.C. 1829b, 12 
U.S.C. 1951–1959, 18 U.S.C. 1956, 1957, and 1960, 
and 31 U.S.C. 5311–5314 and 5316–5332 and notes 
thereto, with implementing regulations at 31 CFR 
chapter X. See 31 CFR 1010.100(e). 
7 31 U.S.C. 5311. 
8 Treasury Order 180–01 (July 1, 2014). 
9 31 U.S.C. 5318(h)(2). 
10 31 U.S.C. 5318(a)(2). 
after a potentially suspicious transaction 
has been identified, as one means of 
determining whether or not the 
identified activity is suspicious. 
When a financial institution detects 
information (including a change in 
beneficial ownership information) about 
the customer in the course of its normal 
monitoring that is relevant to assessing 
or reevaluating the risk posed by the 
customer, it must update the customer 
information, including beneficial 
ownership information. Such 
information could include, e.g., a 
significant and unexplained change in 
the customer’s activity, such as 
executing cross-border wire transfers for 
no apparent reason or a significant 
change in the volume of activity without 
explanation. It could also include 
information indicating a possible 
change in the customer’s beneficial 
ownership, because such information 
could also be relevant to assessing the 
risk posed by the customer. This applies 
to all legal entity customers, including 
those existing on the Applicability Date. 
This provision does not impose a 
categorical requirement that financial 
institutions must update customer 
information, including beneficial 
ownership information, on a continuous 
or periodic basis. Rather, the updating 
requirement is event-driven, and occurs 
as a result of normal monitoring. 
C. Costs and Benefits 
This is a significant regulatory action 
pursuant to Executive Order 12866 
(‘‘E.O. 12866’’) because it is likely to 
result in a final rule that may have an 
annual effect on the economy of $100 
million or more. Accordingly, FinCEN 
published for comment on December 24, 
2015 a preliminary Regulatory Impact 
Assessment (RIA) for the proposed rule 
(80 FR 80308), which provided a 
quantitative estimate of the costs to the 
private sector for which adequate data 
are available and a qualitative 
discussion of both the costs and benefits 
for which data are not available. As a 
result of the comments submitted, 
FinCEN revised the preliminary RIA to 
include additional cost estimates
5 and 
is publishing with this final rule a final 
RIA. The annualized quantified costs 
(under low cost scenarios) are estimated 
to be $153 million (at a seven percent 
discount rate) and $148 million (at a 
three percent discount rate). The 
annualized quantified costs (under high 
cost scenarios) are estimated to be $287 
million (at a seven percent discount 
rate) and $282 million (at a three 
percent discount rate). Because the 
benefits of the rule cannot be quantified, 
FinCEN has utilized a breakeven 
analysis to determine how large the 
final rule’s benefits would have to be in 
order to justify its estimated costs. The 
RIA uses Treasury’s estimate of $300 
billion in illicit proceeds generated 
annually in the United States due to 
financial crimes, to determine the 
minimum level of effectiveness that the 
final rule would need to achieve for the 
benefits to equal the costs. Based on this 
analysis, using the upper bound of our 
cost assessment, FinCEN has concluded 
that the final rule would only have to 
reduce illicit activity by 0.6 percent to 
yield a positive net benefit. The 
Treasury Department believes that the 
final rule will reduce illicit activity by 
a greater amount than this. 
II. Background 
A. The Bank Secrecy Act 
FinCEN exercises regulatory functions 
primarily under the Currency and 
Foreign Transactions Reporting Act of 
1970, as amended by the USA PATRIOT 
Act of 2001 (PATRIOT Act) and other 
legislation, which legislative framework 
is commonly referred to as the ‘‘Bank 
Secrecy Act’’ (BSA).
6 The BSA 
authorizes the Secretary of the Treasury 
(Secretary) to require financial 
institutions to keep records and file 
reports that ‘‘have a high degree of 
usefulness in criminal, tax, or regulatory 
investigations or proceedings, or in the 
conduct of intelligence or 
counterintelligence activities, including 
analysis, to protect against international 
terrorism.’’
7 
The Secretary has delegated to the 
Director of FinCEN the authority to 
implement, administer, and enforce 
compliance with the BSA and 
associated regulations.
8 FinCEN is 
authorized to impose anti-money 
laundering (AML) program 
requirements on financial institutions,
9 
as well as to require financial 
institutions to maintain procedures to 
ensure compliance with the BSA and 
the regulations promulgated thereunder 
or to guard against money laundering.
10 
B. The Importance of Customer Due 
Diligence 
FinCEN, after consultation with the 
staffs of the Federal functional 
regulators and the Department of 
Justice, has determined that more 
explicit rules for covered financial 
institutions with respect to customer 
due diligence (CDD) are necessary to 
clarify and strengthen CDD within the 
BSA regime, which in turn will enhance 
financial transparency and help to 
safeguard the financial system against 
illicit use. Requiring financial 
institutions to perform effective CDD so 
that they understand who their 
customers are and what type of 
transactions they conduct is a critical 
aspect of combating all forms of illicit 
financial activity, from terrorist 
financing and sanctions evasion to more 
traditional financial crimes, including 
money laundering, fraud, and tax 
evasion. For FinCEN, the key elements 
of CDD include: (i) Identifying and 
verifying the identity of customers; (ii) 
identifying and verifying the identity of 
beneficial owners of legal entity 
customers (i.e., the natural persons who 
own or control legal entities); (iii) 
understanding the nature and purpose 
of customer relationships; and (iv) 
conducting ongoing monitoring. 
Collectively, these elements comprise 
the minimum standard of CDD, which 
FinCEN believes is fundamental to an 
effective AML program. 
Clarifying and strengthening CDD 
requirements for U.S. financial 
institutions, including with respect to 
the identification of beneficial owners, 
advance the purposes of the BSA by: 
(1) Enhancing the availability to law 
enforcement, as well as to the Federal 
functional regulators and self-regulatory 
organizations (SROs), of beneficial 
ownership information about legal 
entity customers obtained by U.S. 
financial institutions, which assists law 
enforcement financial investigations 
and a variety of regulatory examinations 
and investigations; 
(2) Increasing the ability of financial 
institutions, law enforcement, and the 
intelligence community to identify the 
assets and accounts of terrorist 
organizations, corrupt actors, money 
launderers, drug kingpins, proliferators 
of weapons of mass destruction, and 
other national security threats, which 
strengthens compliance with sanctions 
programs designed to undercut 
financing and support for such persons; 
(3) Helping financial institutions 
assess and mitigate risk, and comply 
with all existing legal requirements, 
including the BSA and related 
authorities; 
VerDate Sep<11>2014 18:50 May 10, 2016 Jkt 238001 PO 00000 Frm 00003 Fmt 4701 Sfmt 4700 E:\FR\FM\11MYR3.SGM 11MYR3mstockstill on DSK3G9T082PROD with RULES3
--- page 3 ---
29404 Federal Register / Vol. 81, No. 91 / Wednesday, May 11, 2016 / Rules and Regulations 
consulting with the applicable SROs in the 
securities and futures/commodities industries. 
all BSA rulemakings, FinCEN 
determines the appropriate minimum 
regulatory standards that should apply 
across an industry. From that baseline, 
the Federal functional regulators have 
authority to establish AML program 
requirements in addition to those 
established by FinCEN that they 
determine are necessary and appropriate 
to address risk or vulnerabilities specific 
to the financial institutions they 
regulate. This is particularly true within 
the context of separate but related 
concerns that exist for these institutions 
beyond the strict scope of AML, such as 
in the area of safety and soundness. 
These statements simply reflect this 
basic reality of the existing regulatory 
framework. Furthermore, as we have 
maintained throughout this rulemaking 
process, one of our overarching goals 
was to clarify and harmonize 
expectations while at the same time 
minimizing disruption to the greatest 
extent possible. Accordingly, we believe 
that it is critical to make clear— 
especially with respect to the changes to 
the AML program rules—that these 
standards simply articulate current 
practices pursuant to existing standards 
and expectations, in order to facilitate 
implementation and minimize the 
burden on financial institutions. We 
believe that leveraging the experience 
accrued from interpretation of and 
compliance with prior regulations and 
guidance that have already been issued 
in this space will be a net benefit to 
financial institutions. As FinCEN 
explained in the proposal, these 
requirements represent a floor, not a 
ceiling, and, consistent with the risk- 
based approach, financial institutions 
may do more in circumstances of 
heightened risk, as well as to mitigate 
risks generally. 
Compliance Deadline. Most 
commenters strongly opposed FinCEN’s 
proposal for a compliance deadline of 
one year from the date the final rule is 
issued, identifying a wide range of 
changes to systems and processes that 
would be required in order to 
implement the rule. Many of these 
commenters requested that FinCEN 
provide financial institutions two years 
to implement the final rule. Based on 
the well-founded, detailed explanations 
put forth by these commenters of the 
difficulties that would arise from a one- 
year implementation period, FinCEN is 
extending the period for 
implementation to two years from the 
date this final rule is issued (the 
Applicability Date). 
III. Section-by-Section Analysis 
Section 1010.230 Beneficial 
Ownership Requirements for Legal 
Entity Customers 
Section 1010.230(a) In general. As 
proposed, this paragraph delineated in 
broad terms the scope of the beneficial 
ownership obligation—i.e., that covered 
financial institutions are required to 
establish and maintain written 
procedures reasonably designed to 
identify and verify the identities of 
beneficial owners of legal entity 
customers. There were no significant 
objections to this general formulation, 
and we are adopting it as proposed, 
with the addition that the procedures 
adopted will be included in the 
institution’s AML program. 
Several commenters questioned the 
efficacy of having financial institutions 
collect beneficial ownership 
information, contending that State 
government offices responsible for the 
formation and registration of legal 
entities and/or the IRS would be better 
suited to collect this information due to 
their roles in the company formation 
process. Although FinCEN supports the 
collection of beneficial ownership 
information in these other 
circumstances as well, it does not 
believe that such collection would 
replace the independent obligation of 
financial institutions to collect this 
information. As described above, we 
view this rulemaking as but one part of 
Treasury’s comprehensive strategy to 
enhance financial transparency in the 
U.S. financial system and worldwide, 
and we believe the beneficial ownership 
requirement for financial institutions 
would be necessary even if these other 
measures were already in place. One of 
the principal rationales for this new 
requirement is that financial institutions 
should know who their customers are to 
help them more effectively mitigate 
risks. This requirement is therefore 
separate from a policy objective of 
requiring States to obtain beneficial 
ownership information from the legal 
entities they create at the time of 
formation and upon specified 
circumstances thereafter (although none 
currently have such requirements). 
Presently, corporate laws and 
regulations differ from State to State, 
and from FinCEN’s regulations, but 
generally do not require information 
regarding beneficial ownership. Thus, 
the information that will be provided 
under FinCEN’s regulations will 
significantly augment information 
presently available to law enforcement 
from State authorities, thereby 
improving the overall investigative, 
regulatory, and prosecutorial processes. 
In the NPRM, FinCEN proposed that 
the beneficial ownership requirement 
would apply only with respect to legal 
entity customers that open new 
accounts going forward from the date of 
implementation, noting that many 
commenters to the ANPRM viewed a 
retroactive requirement to obtain 
beneficial ownership information for all 
existing accounts as extremely 
burdensome. We received comments 
reflecting a wide range of views on this 
subject. The vast majority of 
commenters who addressed this issue 
reiterated this objection to retroactive 
application of the beneficial ownership 
obligation. A few commenters, however, 
urged FinCEN to require covered 
financial institutions to collect 
beneficial ownership information on 
existing accounts on a categorical basis, 
while some others thought that financial 
institutions should collect this 
information retroactively for all higher 
risk customers. 
We decline to impose a categorical, 
retroactive requirement. Based on our 
understanding of the significant changes 
to processes and systems that will be 
required to implement this requirement 
simply on a prospective basis, we 
believe that retroactive application 
would be unduly burdensome. As we 
noted in the proposal, the absence of a 
categorical mandate to apply the 
requirement retroactively would not 
preclude financial institutions from 
deciding that collecting beneficial 
ownership information on some 
customers on a risk basis during the 
course of monitoring may be 
appropriate for their institution. In our 
assessment, we have concluded that 
financial institutions should obtain 
beneficial ownership information from 
customers existing on the Applicability 
Date when, in the course of their normal 
monitoring, the financial institution 
detects information relevant to assessing 
or reevaluating the risk of such 
customer (as more fully described in the 
sections below addressing the amended 
AML program requirements). 
Section 1010.230(b) Identification and 
Verification. In the NPRM, FinCEN 
proposed that covered financial 
institutions be required to develop 
customer due diligence procedures that 
enabled institutions to (1) identify the 
beneficial owner(s) of legal entity 
customers by collecting a mandatory 
certification form provided by the 
individual opening the account on 
behalf of the legal entity customer; and 
(2) verify the identity of the identified 
beneficial owner(s) according to risk- 
based procedures that are, at a 
minimum, identical to the institutions’ 
CIP procedures required for verifying 
VerDate Sep<11>2014 18:50 May 10, 2016 Jkt 238001 PO 00000 Frm 00008 Fmt 4701 Sfmt 4700 E:\FR\FM\11MYR3.SGM 11MYR3mstockstill on DSK3G9T082PROD with RULES3
--- page 4 ---
29405 Federal Register / Vol. 81, No. 91 / Wednesday, May 11, 2016 / Rules and Regulations 
36 31 CFR 1010.630(b). 
37 This revision will also require a corresponding 
change to the Recordkeeping subsection, described 
in greater detail below. 
the identity of customers that are 
individuals. 
Section 1010.230(b)(1). The NPRM 
proposed to require the use of a 
standard certification form (Certification 
Form) in order to, among other 
purposes, promote consistent practices 
and regulatory expectations, reduce 
compliance burden, and provide a 
uniform customer experience across 
much of the U.S. financial system. To 
facilitate institutions’ abilities to rely 
upon the Certification Form, the 
proposed Certification Form included a 
section that required the individual 
opening the account on behalf of a legal 
entity customer to certify that the 
information provided on the form is true 
and accurate to the best of his or her 
knowledge. Commenters raised a 
number of issues regarding this 
proposed requirement. Some 
commenters asked whether the 
Certification Form must be used to 
obtain the information, whether the 
Certification Form should be an official 
government form, and what individuals 
representing the customer would be 
authorized to provide the Certification 
Form. Several commenters urged a 
variety of changes to the fields on the 
Certification Form in order to conform 
it more closely to current CIP 
requirements, to otherwise facilitate use 
of the form, and to promote other 
regulatory goals. Some commenters also 
urged FinCEN to provide a safe harbor 
to institutions that use the model 
Certification Form adopted in the final 
rule akin to, for example, the safe harbor 
provided for foreign bank 
certifications.
36 
The comments FinCEN received 
related to the Certification Form varied 
widely. Some commenters urged 
FinCEN to make the Certification Form 
an official U.S. Government document, 
with the certification made under the 
penalty of perjury (rather than only to 
the best of the knowledge of the 
certifying party), and a few commenters 
thought that the Certification Form 
should be notarized. However, many 
commenters requested that the proposed 
Certification Form be permissive rather 
than mandatory, and that financial 
institutions be permitted to obtain the 
information through their standard 
account opening process without 
utilizing the Certification Form. A few 
commenters thought that the person 
opening the account should be required 
to have actual personal knowledge of 
the information provided on the 
Certification Form, or that the 
certification should take the form of a 
resolution ratified or adopted by the 
legal entity’s board or governing body. 
These commenters thought that a 
Certification Form without attestation 
requirements more substantial than 
those in the proposal would reduce 
accountability for false representations 
on the Certification Form. 
As noted above, a primary reason that 
FinCEN proposed the Form was to 
balance the benefits and burdens of this 
new requirement to the financial 
institution and its customers with the 
benefits to law enforcement and 
regulatory authorities. We also note that 
in the case of many legal entities that 
are small businesses, the natural person 
opening the account will often be one of 
the beneficial owners, who would have 
direct knowledge of the beneficial 
ownership information of the legal 
entity customer. FinCEN understands 
that many institutions obtain and 
maintain customer data electronically 
rather than in paper form to the greatest 
extent possible, and that mandating the 
use and retention of a specific form 
would require significant technological 
and operational changes that could be 
costly and challenging to implement for 
some financial institutions. We have 
therefore amended the final rule to 
permit, but not require, financial 
institutions to use the Certification 
Form to collect beneficial ownership 
information. Accordingly, in the final 
rule, § 1010.230(b)(1) is revised to state 
that covered financial institutions must 
identify the beneficial owner(s) of each 
legal entity customer at the time a new 
account is opened, unless the customer 
is otherwise excluded or the account is 
exempted. A covered financial 
institution may accomplish this either 
by obtaining certification in the form of 
appendix A of the section from the 
individual opening the account on 
behalf of the legal entity customer, or by 
obtaining from the individual the 
information required by the form by 
another means, provided the individual 
certifies, to the best of the individual’s 
knowledge, the accuracy of the 
information.
37 
Thus, covered financial institutions 
can satisfy this requirement through (1) 
the use of FinCEN’s Certification Form; 
(2) the use of the financial institution’s 
own forms, so long as they meet the 
requirements of § 1010.230(b)(1); or (3) 
any other means that satisfy the 
substantive requirements of 
§ 1010.230(b)(1). These records may be 
retained electronically and incorporated 
into existing databases as a part of 
financial institutions’ overall 
management of customer files, and 
covered financial institutions will have 
flexibility in integrating the beneficial 
ownership information requirement into 
existing systems and processes. The 
certification of accuracy by the 
individual submitting the information 
may be obtained without use of the 
Certification Form in the same way the 
financial institution obtains other 
information from its customers in 
connection with its account opening 
procedures. FinCEN expects that such 
flexibility will facilitate the 
implementation of the beneficial 
ownership requirement—some 
commenters noted that giving financial 
institutions flexibility in integrating this 
requirement would substantially reduce 
resource outlays to change customer 
onboarding processes and to train front- 
line employees. In addition, to facilitate 
use of the Certification Form by those 
institutions that choose to utilize it, 
FinCEN will also make an electronic 
version available, although it will not be 
an official U.S. Government form. 
Some commenters asked that FinCEN 
clarify who an appropriate individual to 
certify the identity of the beneficial 
owners to the financial institution 
would be, whether by signing the 
Certification Form or otherwise 
providing the beneficial ownership 
information in accordance with this 
paragraph; some commenters also 
questioned whether the individual 
opening an account could be a low-level 
employee without knowledge of the 
entity’s owners. In this regard, FinCEN 
declines to impose specific account- 
opening procedures on financial 
institutions, and believes that financial 
institutions should be able to integrate 
this new requirement into their 
institution’s existing procedures with 
little disruption. FinCEN understands 
that financial institutions generally have 
long-standing policies and procedures, 
based on sound business practices and 
prudential considerations, governing the 
documentation required to open an 
account for a legal entity; these typically 
include resolutions authorizing the 
entity to open an account at the 
institution and identifying the 
authorized signatories. Such resolutions 
are typically certified by an appropriate 
individual, e.g., the secretary or other 
officer of a corporation, a member or 
manager of an LLC, or partner of a 
partnership. It would be appropriate for 
the same individual to certify the 
identity of the beneficial owners. Such 
an individual would typically have at 
least some familiarity with the entity’s 
owners and with individuals with 
responsibility to control or manage the 
VerDate Sep<11>2014 18:50 May 10, 2016 Jkt 238001 PO 00000 Frm 00009 Fmt 4701 Sfmt 4700 E:\FR\FM\11MYR3.SGM 11MYR3mstockstill on DSK3G9T082PROD with RULES3
--- page 5 ---
29406 Federal Register / Vol. 81, No. 91 / Wednesday, May 11, 2016 / Rules and Regulations 
38 FinCEN notes that in cases where the 
individual signing the documentation to open the 
account (and identifying the legal entity’s beneficial 
owners) does not deliver such documentation to the 
financial institution, it may be appropriate that the 
individual’s signature be notarized. 
39 FinCEN also understands that in cases where 
a newly formed legal entity opens a financial 
institution account in order to commence business, 
the beneficial owner(s) would typically open the 
account in person and be the signatories on the 
account, and could readily certify their status as 
beneficial owners at that time. 
entity, but may not have personal 
knowledge of individuals having an 
indirect ownership interest through, for 
example, intermediate legal entities or 
contractual arrangements with nominal 
owners, and would have to rely on 
others for any such information. 
Therefore, while FinCEN anticipates 
that the certifying individual would 
generally be able to provide accurate 
beneficial ownership information, it is 
appropriate that it be provided to the 
best of such person’s knowledge, rather 
than without qualification. Accordingly, 
FinCEN declines to require a heightened 
knowledge threshold, or notarization, or 
board approval requirement for the 
certification requirement, as some 
commenters suggested, as any such 
requirement would increase the amount 
of time to open an account, without 
commensurate benefit, and would be 
inconsistent with FinCEN’s goal of 
integrating this requirement into 
existing financial institution onboarding 
procedures to the greatest extent 
possible.
38 FinCEN thus believes that 
the certification requirement as 
described in the final rule provides the 
appropriate level of accountability given 
the circumstances.
39 
Some commenters urged FinCEN to 
permit financial institutions to rely 
upon alternative sources, such as 
previously collected customer 
information in their databases, or the 
IRS Form W–8BEN, to satisfy the 
certification requirement. FinCEN 
recognizes that this could facilitate 
financial institutions’ ability to obtain 
this information. However, to be of 
greatest use, FinCEN believes that 
beneficial ownership information must 
be, at the time of account opening, both 
(1) current, and (2) certified by an 
individual authorized by the customer 
to open accounts at financial 
institutions to be accurate to the best of 
his or her knowledge. Furthermore, 
because FinCEN’s definition of 
beneficial ownership does not align 
precisely with, for example, the IRS’s 
definition in its Form W–8BEN, 
permitting reliance in some 
circumstances upon other agencies’ 
forms would be at odds with FinCEN’s 
goal of consistent beneficial ownership 
standards within and across industries 
for purposes of CDD. Thus, FinCEN 
declines to permit reliance solely upon 
previously gathered alternate sources of 
beneficial ownership information. 
Several commenters raised specific 
questions regarding the information in 
the proposed Certification Form. 
FinCEN agrees with the suggestions 
made by several commenters that the 
title of the person with significant 
management responsibility, as well as of 
the person submitting the Certification 
Form or supplying the information, 
should be included and has made these 
changes to the Form. We have also 
added fields on the Certification Form 
in which to identify the type of legal 
entity, and to note its address. Other 
commenters noted that the address 
fields as laid out in the proposed 
Certification Form, along with the 
description of the address requirement 
in the general instructions section, were 
not congruent with CIP’s address 
requirements, and accordingly asked 
FinCEN to confirm that the CIP rules’ 
address requirements remained 
applicable. As described in greater 
detail below, covered financial 
institutions’ procedures for identifying 
and verifying beneficial owners must 
contain all the elements of the 
applicable CIP rule, including the 
address, date of birth, and Taxpayer 
Identification Number requirements as 
set forth therein. Accordingly, FinCEN 
has revised the Certification Form to 
clarify this point, and notes that this 
information will be required whether or 
not the Certification Form is used. We 
have also amended item ‘‘a’’ of the 
Certification Form to clarify that the 
name of the certifying party should be 
that of a natural person authorized to 
open the account (and not of the legal 
entity itself). FinCEN also agrees with 
the suggestion made by a number of 
commenters that the Certification Form 
state that the information in the 
Certification Form is required by 
Federal regulation in order to explain to 
customers why this new requirement 
has been put in place; the Form has 
been edited appropriately. 
Several commenters sought 
clarification as to whether a financial 
institution must identify and verify a 
legal entity customer’s beneficial 
owners each time it opens a new 
account at the institution after the rule’s 
compliance deadline, or whether the 
requirement applies only the first time 
it opens a new account at such 
institution. FinCEN has concluded that, 
while it is not requiring periodic 
updating of the beneficial ownership 
information of all legal entity customers 
at specified intervals, the opening of a 
new account is a relatively convenient 
and otherwise appropriate occasion to 
obtain current information regarding a 
customer’s beneficial owners. 
Accordingly, FinCEN has added to the 
final rule as § 1010.230(g) a definition 
for ‘‘new account’’. 
One commenter urged FinCEN to 
mandate the use of the Legal Entity 
Identifier (LEI), a global standardized 
unique identifier for legal entities 
engaged in financial transactions, on the 
proposed Certification Form. This 
commenter noted that including such a 
requirement would further the goals of 
transparency and financial stability. 
FinCEN understands that the LEI was 
developed principally to aggregate data 
from across markets, products, and 
regions, giving global regulators a means 
to quickly identify parties to financial 
transactions, in order to enhance 
regulators’ ability to understand 
systemic risks to the financial system 
and act accordingly. Although this is an 
important and laudable purpose, 
FinCEN does not believe that mandating 
the LEI’s inclusion on the beneficial 
ownership Certification Form would 
further this goal substantially. We 
believe that the overwhelming majority 
of legal entities subject to this 
requirement will be smaller or non- 
financial entities that would not be 
typical applicants for LEIs in the first 
instance, and that the costs of 
mandating its use solely for the 
purposes of the Certification Form 
would not be outweighed by the benefit. 
FinCEN also understands that the 
authorized bodies that assign LEIs do 
not require the beneficial owner to be a 
natural person, use a 50 (rather than 25) 
percent threshold, and do not verify the 
identities of beneficial owners of legal 
entities, thereby rendering the LEI’s 
utility as a possible proxy or alternative 
source of verification minimal. For these 
reasons, FinCEN declines to mandate 
the use of the LEI. We do, however, 
recognize that covered financial 
institutions may find such information 
useful for enterprise-wide risk 
management or other purposes, and 
have accordingly included an optional 
LEI field on the Certification Form. 
Several commenters urged FinCEN to 
adopt an express safe harbor in the final 
rule deeming those financial institutions 
that use the Certification Form 
compliant with the beneficial 
ownership requirement. A few 
commenters recommended that FinCEN 
model such an express safe harbor on 
the safe harbor for foreign bank 
certifications found in § 1010.630. Other 
commenters opposed the notion of a 
safe harbor, contending that the 
Certification Form should serve as the 
VerDate Sep<11>2014 18:50 May 10, 2016 Jkt 238001 PO 00000 Frm 00010 Fmt 4701 Sfmt 4700 E:\FR\FM\11MYR3.SGM 11MYR3mstockstill on DSK3G9T082PROD with RULES3
--- page 6 ---
29407 Federal Register / Vol. 81, No. 91 / Wednesday, May 11, 2016 / Rules and Regulations 
40 12 U.S.C. 3401 et seq. 
41 15 U.S.C. 6801 et seq. 
42 FinCEN stated that ‘‘[i] n light of these 
considerations, FinCEN is not proposing that 
financial institutions verify the status of a beneficial 
owner. Financial institutions may rely on the 
beneficial ownership information provided by the 
customer on the standard certification form.’’ On 
the other hand, the proposal also states that its 
procedures for verifying beneficial ownership 
‘‘should enable the financial institution to form a 
reasonable belief that it knows the true identity of 
the beneficial owner of each legal entity customer.’’ 
(79 FR 45162) 
43 15 U.S.C. 1681 et seq. 
44 The clause ‘‘in the covered financial 
institution’s Customer Identification Program 
procedures’’ in the proposed rule text have been 
deleted, because, for the reasons described above, 
the verification procedures for beneficial owners of 
legal entity customers may be different from the 
procedures in the covered financial institution’s CIP 
that apply to individual customers. 
starting point for financial institutions’ 
risk-based due diligence into a legal 
entity’s beneficial ownership. As 
discussed in greater detail below, we 
have included in § 1010.230(b)(2) of the 
final rule a description of the extent to 
which financial institutions can rely 
upon the beneficial ownership 
information provided by the person 
opening the account. We decline, 
however, to include in the final rule a 
blanket safe harbor triggered by the use 
and collection of the standard 
Certification Form. 
FinCEN believes that there are a 
number of factors present in the context 
of foreign bank certifications (but absent 
here) that make a blanket safe harbor 
appropriate in that context. The foreign 
bank certification was used to satisfy 
several obligations arising under 
Sections 313 and 319(b) of the USA 
PATRIOT Act, including not only for 
the foreign bank to certify facts such as 
its status and in certain cases its owners, 
but also to set forth its agreement not to 
provide banking services to foreign shell 
banks and to appoint a U.S. process 
agent. Moreover the foreign bank official 
was required to certify that the 
information in the document was true 
and correct, whereas the beneficial 
ownership information is to be provided 
to the best of the knowledge of the 
customer’s agent. In addition, the 
population of legal entities subject to 
the final rule is exponentially larger 
than that of foreign banks with U.S. 
correspondent accounts, and the 
proposed certification in the proposed 
rule does not include affirmative 
obligations. We believe that the 
provision inserted into § 1010.230(b)(2) 
of the final rule describing the extent to 
which the financial institution may rely 
on the information provided by the 
customer strikes the right balance 
between the need to minimize burden 
upon covered financial institutions and 
the risk of abuse of legal entities for 
illicit purposes. 
A few commenters raised concerns 
that the collection of sensitive personal 
information of beneficial owners would 
impinge upon their privacy and increase 
their vulnerability to identity theft. 
FinCEN recognizes the critical 
importance of protecting individuals’ 
privacy interests, as well as the serious 
threat posed by cyberattacks and 
identity theft, particularly with respect 
to the personal information held at 
financial institutions. These concerns, 
while valid and significant, are 
insufficient to justify elimination of the 
requirement. From both the privacy and 
identity-theft perspectives, the 
incremental impact upon the vast 
majority of beneficial owners will be 
slight, because, pursuant to CIP 
requirements, they already have to 
provide the same sensitive personal 
information to financial institutions to 
open individual accounts and access the 
U.S. financial system. We note that 
financial institutions are expected to 
protect this information just as they do 
CIP information, as well as comply with 
all applicable Federal and State privacy 
laws, including, but not limited to, the 
Right to Financial Privacy Act
40 and the 
Gramm-Leach-Bliley Act.41 
Section 1010.230(b)(2). With respect 
to verification of identity, we proposed 
that verification meant that financial 
institutions were required to verify the 
identity of the individual identified as a 
beneficial owner (i.e., to verify the 
individual’s existence), and not his or 
her status as a beneficial owner. We 
proposed that this verification be done 
via risk-based procedures that are 
identical to the institutions’ CIP 
procedures required for verifying the 
identity of customers that are 
individuals, to facilitate financial 
institutions’ implementation of the 
requirement through leveraging existing 
procedures and systems. 
Many commenters sought clarification 
of the meaning of the verification 
requirement in proposed 
§ 1010.230(b)(2) and the means by 
which it may be accomplished. Some 
pointed out the potential confusion 
between two statements in the NPRM 
discussing the distinction between 
verifying the identity of the beneficial 
owner and verifying the status.
42 In 
order to resolve any potential confusion 
regarding the beneficial ownership 
identification and verification obligation 
of financial institutions, FinCEN is 
revising § 1010.230(b)(2) in the final 
rule to clarify that a covered financial 
institution may rely on the information 
supplied by the legal entity customer 
regarding the identity of its beneficial 
owner or owners, provided that it has 
no knowledge of facts that would 
reasonably call into question the 
reliability of such information. FinCEN 
anticipates that, in the overwhelming 
majority of cases, a covered financial 
institution should be able to rely on the 
accuracy of the beneficial owner or 
owners identified by the legal entity 
customer, absent the institution’s 
knowledge to the contrary. FinCEN 
recognizes the necessity for permitting 
reliance on the identification supplied 
by the legal entity customer, considering 
the fact the customer is generally the 
best source of this information, and that 
there is generally no other source of 
beneficial ownership information 
available to covered financial 
institutions, aside from the legal entity 
itself. 
Several commenters sought 
clarification of the requirement as 
described in the NPRM in proposed 
§ 1010.230(b)(2) that beneficial 
ownership information procedures be, 
at a minimum, ‘‘identical’’ to the 
existing CIP procedures for verifying the 
identity of individual customers. Some 
commenters noted that it would be 
infeasible to simply replicate, without 
modification, existing CIP procedures 
for individual customers to implement 
the beneficial ownership verification 
requirement. They noted, for example, 
that because the beneficial owners will 
in many cases not be physically present 
at the financial institution at account 
opening, an institution using 
documentary verification may not have 
access to the documents listed in the 
relevant paragraph of the CIP rule, and 
therefore may need to rely on a 
photocopy or other reproduction of such 
document. Commenters also noted that 
some current procedures for non- 
documentary verification of individual 
customers could not be applied to non- 
consenting beneficial owners, because 
of limitations on the use of credit 
reports imposed by the Fair Credit 
Reporting Act.
43 
FinCEN agrees that it would be 
impracticable for covered financial 
institutions to implement the beneficial 
ownership verification requirement 
with procedures that are identical to the 
institution’s existing CIP rule 
procedures for individual customers. 
Accordingly, § 1010.230(b)(2) has been 
amended to require that at a minimum, 
these procedures must contain the 
elements
44 required for verifying the 
identity of customers that are 
individuals under paragraph (a)(2) of 
VerDate Sep<11>2014 18:50 May 10, 2016 Jkt 238001 PO 00000 Frm 00011 Fmt 4701 Sfmt 4700 E:\FR\FM\11MYR3.SGM 11MYR3mstockstill on DSK3G9T082PROD with RULES3
--- page 7 ---
29408 Federal Register / Vol. 81, No. 91 / Wednesday, May 11, 2016 / Rules and Regulations 
45 Paragraph (a)(2) of each of the CIP rules 
requires that the relevant financial institution’s CIP 
includes risk-based procedures to verify the identity 
of each customer, to the extent reasonable and 
practicable. The elements of such program must 
include identifying the customer, verifying the 
customer’s identity (through documents or non- 
documentary methods), and procedures for 
circumstances where the institution cannot form a 
reasonable belief that it knows the true identity of 
the individual. 
46 Relevant documentation may include 
unexpired government-issued identification 
evidencing nationality or residence and bearing a 
photograph or similar safeguard, such as a driver’s 
license or passport. See, e.g., 31 CFR 
1020.220(a)(2)(ii)(A)(1). 
47 Under the CIP rules, a financial institution’s 
CIP must include procedures for responding to 
circumstances in which the financial institution 
cannot form a reasonable belief that it knows the 
true identity of a customer. These procedures 
should describe: (A) When the institution should 
not open an account; (B) The terms under which a 
customer may use an account while the institution 
attempts to verify the customer’s identity; (C) When 
it should close an account, after attempts to verify 
a customer’s identity have failed; and (D) When it 
should file a Suspicious Activity Report in 
accordance with applicable law and regulation. See, 
e.g., 31 CFR 1020.220(a)(2)(iii). 
48 See, e.g., Customer Identification Programs for 
Banks, Savings Associations, Credit Unions and 
Certain Non-Federally Regulated Banks, 68 FR 
25090, 25099 (May 9, 2003). 
the applicable CIP rule,45 but are not 
required to be identical. In addition, the 
final rule clarifies that in the case of 
documentary verification, the financial 
institution may use photocopies or other 
reproductions of the documents listed 
in paragraph (a)(2)(ii)(A)(1)
46 of the 
applicable CIP rule. 
Because the risk-based verification 
procedures must contain the same 
elements as required by the applicable 
CIP rule to verify the identity of 
individual customers, verification must 
be completed within a reasonable time 
after the account is opened. In addition, 
the beneficial ownership identification 
procedures must address situations in 
which the financial institution cannot 
form a reasonable belief that it knows 
the true identity of the beneficial owner 
of a legal entity customer after following 
the required procedures.
47 It remains 
the case that covered financial 
institutions may generally rely on 
government-issued identification as 
verification of an individual’s identity, 
absent obvious indications of fraud.
48 
FinCEN notes that such reliance is also 
generally appropriate in the case of 
photocopies or other reproductions 
obtained pursuant to § 1010.230(b)(2). 
However, given the vulnerabilities 
inherent in the reproduction process, 
covered financial institutions should 
conduct their own risk-based analyses 
of the types of photocopies or 
reproductions that they will accept in 
accordance with this section, so that 
such reliance is reasonable. For 
example, a covered financial institution 
could determine that it will not accept 
reproductions below a certain optical 
resolution, or that it will not accept 
reproductions transmitted via facsimile, 
or that it will only accept digital 
reproductions transmitted in certain file 
formats. As with CIP, covered financial 
institutions are not required to maintain 
these copies or reproductions, but only 
a description of any document upon 
which the financial institution relied to 
verify the identity of the beneficial 
owner. We note, however, that although 
covered financial institutions are not 
required to maintain these 
reproductions, they are not prohibited 
from keeping them in a manner 
consistent with all other applicable laws 
or regulations. 
Some commenters urged FinCEN to 
permit covered financial institutions to 
take a risk-based, rather than 
categorical, approach to the 
identification and verification 
requirements. Among the objections 
lodged against a categorical requirement 
were that: Conducting CIP procedures 
on non-present beneficial owners would 
be too difficult; the benefit of a 
categorical requirement was outweighed 
by the costs; and expanding the number 
of natural persons subject to CIP 
procedures would increase costs, 
particularly for institutions that rely 
upon vendors that charge on a per 
capita basis for CIP. FinCEN believes 
that categorical application of this 
requirement across covered financial 
institutions will reduce illicit actors’ 
opportunities to slip into the financial 
system by masking their legal entities 
with markers indicative of a low risk 
profile. As to concerns about costs and 
difficulties, we believe that the above- 
described changes and clarifications 
made to this paragraph have given 
financial institutions greater flexibility 
in determining how to implement the 
identification and verification 
requirements, thereby reducing their 
impact. As described above, because 
financial institutions will in most 
instances be able to rely upon the 
information provided by the customer, 
FinCEN believes that financial 
institutions generally will not expend 
substantially greater resources by 
collecting and verifying the information 
in all cases (subject to permitted 
exemptions) than by engaging in a risk 
analysis to determine whether the 
beneficial ownership information 
should be collected and verified. We 
recognize that financial institutions that 
pay for systems and technology costs 
associated with CIP procedures on a per 
capita basis will face increased costs 
from identifying and verifying the 
identities of additional natural persons. 
However, we believe that the benefits of 
collecting this information, as described 
at greater length above and below, 
outweigh these additional costs. FinCEN 
accordingly declines to alter the 
categorical nature of the requirement for 
the final rule. 
Several commenters questioned the 
utility of collecting this information in 
the absence of an authoritative 
centralized resource against which to 
verify beneficial ownership status. They 
contended that the limited benefit of 
this information would not outweigh 
the costs imposed by the requirement. 
Law enforcement commenters, however, 
identified significant benefits to the 
collection of beneficial ownership 
information, regardless of financial 
institutions’ ability to verify ownership 
status. They noted that the identities of 
verified natural persons linked to legal 
entities of interest had significant value 
in law enforcement investigations, 
whether or not those natural persons are 
the actual beneficial owners, since at a 
minimum they may have information 
that can aid law enforcement in 
identifying the true beneficial owner(s). 
Furthermore, false beneficial ownership 
information is of significant use to 
prosecutors in demonstrating 
consciousness of guilt, as well as for 
impeachment purposes at trial. And law 
enforcement also noted the likely 
deterrent effect that a categorical 
collection and verification requirement 
would have on illicit actors, by making 
it more difficult for them to maintain 
anonymity while opening accounts. For 
these reasons, FinCEN rejects the notion 
that this requirement is of limited value. 
A few commenters requested that 
FinCEN eliminate the verification 
requirement entirely, contending that 
verification of the identities of non- 
present beneficial owners would be too 
difficult and burdensome, especially for 
smaller institutions. As described above, 
we are aware of the challenges 
associated with verifying the identities 
of non-present individuals and have 
accordingly made changes to simplify 
the process for financial institutions, 
which we expect will reduce the 
burden. Importantly, collecting 
beneficial ownership information 
without verifying the existence of the 
named person would substantially 
diminish the value of the information, 
and we therefore decline to eliminate 
the verification requirement. 
Some commenters asked FinCEN to 
clarify what we expect financial 
institutions to do with the beneficial 
ownership information that they collect 
and verify. FinCEN generally expects 
VerDate Sep<11>2014 18:50 May 10, 2016 Jkt 238001 PO 00000 Frm 00012 Fmt 4701 Sfmt 4700 E:\FR\FM\11MYR3.SGM 11MYR3mstockstill on DSK3G9T082PROD with RULES3
--- page 8 ---
29409 Federal Register / Vol. 81, No. 91 / Wednesday, May 11, 2016 / Rules and Regulations 
49 See generally 31 CFR part 500; see also, e.g., 
31 CFR 590.406 (Ukraine-related sanctions 
regulations); Office of Foreign Assets Control, 
Frequently Asked Questions, available at http://
www.treasury.gov/resource-center/faqs/Sanctions/
Pages/faq_general.aspx#50_percent. 
50 See 31 CFR 1010.313; FinCEN, Currency 
Transaction Report Aggregation for Businesses with 
Common Ownership FIN–2012–G001, (Mar. 16, 
2012) (FIN–2012–G001); FinCEN, Currency 
Transaction Reporting: Aggregation, FinCEN Ruling 
2001–2, (Aug. 23, 2001). 
51 31 CFR 1010.313. 
52 In general, such aggregation would only be 
appropriate in cases where an individual owns all 
or substantially all of the legal entity’s equity 
interests. It is only in such cases that a transaction 
by a legal entity could be considered ‘‘by or on 
behalf of’’ the owner of the entity (or vice versa). 
53 See FIN–2012–G001 at 2. 
beneficial ownership information to be 
treated like CIP and related information, 
and accordingly used to ensure that 
covered financial institutions comply 
with other requirements. For example, 
the Office of Foreign Assets Control 
(OFAC) requires covered financial 
institutions to block accounts (or other 
property and interests in property) of, 
among others, persons appearing on the 
Specially Designated Nationals and 
Blocked Persons List (SDN List), which 
includes any entity that is 50 percent or 
more owned, in the aggregate, by one or 
more blocked persons, regardless of 
whether the entity is formally listed on 
the SDN List.
49 Therefore, institutions 
should use beneficial ownership 
information to help ensure that they do 
not open or maintain an account, or 
otherwise engage in prohibited 
transactions or dealings involving 
individuals or entities subject to OFAC- 
administered sanctions. Covered 
financial institutions should also 
develop risk-based procedures to 
determine whether and/or when 
additional screening of these names 
through, for example, negative media 
search programs, would be appropriate. 
With respect to aggregation of 
transactions for Currency Transaction 
Reporting (CTR) purposes, FinCEN 
expects covered financial institutions to 
apply existing procedures consistent 
with CTR regulations and applicable 
FinCEN guidance from 2001 and 2012.
50 
Thus, while financial institutions 
should generally recognize the 
distinctness of the corporate form and 
not categorically impute the activities or 
transactions of a legal entity customer to 
a beneficial owner, they must aggregate 
multiple currency transactions if the 
financial institution has knowledge that 
these transactions are by or on behalf of 
any person and result in either cash in 
or cash out totaling more than $10,000 
during any one business day.
51 While 
the requirement to identify the 
beneficial owners of legal entity 
customers does not modify this existing 
CTR aggregation requirement, the 
beneficial ownership identification may 
provide financial institutions with 
information they did not previously 
have, in order to determine when 
transactions are ‘‘by or on behalf of’’ the 
same person. Thus, if a financial 
institution determines that a legal entity 
customer or customers are not being 
operated independently from each other 
or from their primary owner—e.g., the 
institution determines that legal entities 
under common ownership have 
common employees and are repeatedly 
used to pay each other’s expenses or the 
personal expenses of their primary 
owner—then the financial institution 
may determine that aggregating the 
transactions of a legal entity or entities 
and their primary owner would be 
appropriate.
52 Under such 
circumstances, if a financial institution 
were aware that a beneficial owner 
made a $5,000 cash deposit into his 
personal account, and later the same 
business day, he made a $6,000 cash 
deposit into the account of a legal entity 
not being operated as an independent 
entity, the institution would be required 
to aggregate those transactions and file 
a CTR.
53 And to the extent that the 
financial institution determined that 
such transactions had no other apparent 
purpose than to avoid triggering a CTR 
filing, the financial institution would 
need to consider whether filing a SAR 
about the transactions would be 
appropriate. 
A few commenters asked FinCEN to 
provide guidance as to how beneficial 
ownership information should be 
incorporated into processes for 
information sharing pursuant to USA 
PATRIOT Act Section 314(a); one of 
these commenters asked FinCEN to 
declare such information per se outside 
of the scope of Section 314(a). FinCEN 
does not expect the information 
obtained pursuant to the beneficial 
ownership requirement to add 
additional requirements with respect to 
Section 314(a) for financial institutions. 
The rule implementing Section 314(a), 
set forth at 31 CFR 1010.520, does not 
authorize the reporting of beneficial 
ownership information associated with 
an account or transaction matching a 
named subject. Under that rule, 
financial institutions need only search 
their records for account or transactions 
matching a named subject, and report to 
FinCEN whether such a match exists 
using the identifying information that 
FinCEN provides. 
Section 1010.230(c) Account. See 
discussion below under ‘‘Legal entity 
customer.’’ 
Section 1010.230(d) Beneficial Owner. 
In the NPRM, we proposed two prongs 
for the definition of beneficial owner: 
Each individual, if any, who directly or 
indirectly owned 25 percent of the 
equity interests of a legal entity 
customer (the ownership prong); and a 
single individual with significant 
responsibility to control, manage, or 
direct a legal entity customer, including 
an executive officer or senior manager 
or any other individual who regularly 
performs similar functions (the control 
prong). We noted that the number of 
beneficial owners identified would vary 
from legal entity customer to legal entity 
customer due to the ownership prong— 
there could be as few as zero and as 
many as four individuals who satisfy 
this prong. All legal entities, however, 
would be required to identify one 
beneficial owner under the control 
prong. We further noted that financial 
institutions had the discretion to 
identify additional beneficial owners as 
appropriate based on risk. 
Thus, in practice, the number of 
beneficial owners identified will vary 
based on the circumstances. For 
example: 
• Mr. and Mrs. Smith each hold a 50 
percent equity interest in ‘‘Mom & Pop, 
LLC.’’ Mrs. Smith is President of Mom 
& Pop, LLC and Mr. Smith is its Vice 
President. Mom & Pop, LLC is required 
to provide the personal information of 
both Mr. & Mrs. Smith under the 
ownership prong. Under the control 
prong, Mom & Pop, LLC is also required 
to provide the personal information of 
one individual with significant 
responsibility to control Mom & Pop, 
LLC; this individual could be either Mr. 
or Mrs. Smith, or a third person who 
otherwise satisfies the definition. Thus, 
in this scenario, Mom & Pop, LLC would 
be required to identify at least two, but 
up to three distinct individuals—both 
Mr. & Mrs. Smith under the ownership 
prong, and either Mr. or Mrs. Smith 
under the control prong, or both Mr. & 
Mrs. Smith under the ownership prong, 
and a third person with significant 
responsibility under the control prong. 
• Acme, Inc. is a closely-held private 
corporation. John Roe holds a 35 
percent equity stake; no other person 
holds a 25 percent or higher equity 
stake. Jane Doe is the President and 
Chief Executive Officer. Acme, Inc. 
would be required to provide John Roe’s 
beneficial ownership information under 
the ownership prong, as well as Jane 
Doe’s (or that of another control person) 
under the control prong. 
• Quentin, Inc. is owned by the five 
Quentin siblings, each of whom holds a 
20 percent equity stake. Its President is 
Benton Quentin, the eldest sibling, who 
VerDate Sep<11>2014 18:50 May 10, 2016 Jkt 238001 PO 00000 Frm 00013 Fmt 4701 Sfmt 4700 E:\FR\FM\11MYR3.SGM 11MYR3mstockstill on DSK3G9T082PROD with RULES3
--- page 9 ---
29410 Federal Register / Vol. 81, No. 91 / Wednesday, May 11, 2016 / Rules and Regulations 
is the only individual at Quentin, Inc. 
with significant management 
responsibility. Quentin, Inc. would be 
required to provide Benton Quentin’s 
beneficial ownership information under 
the control prong, but no other 
beneficial ownership information under 
the ownership prong, because no sibling 
has a 25 percent stake or greater. 
One commenter raised a concern that 
this obligation would effectively require 
financial institutions to monitor the 
equity interests and management team 
of legal entity customers on an ongoing 
basis and continually update this 
information. FinCEN notes that it would 
be impracticable for financial 
institutions to conduct this type of 
inquiry, and emphasizes that this 
obligation should be considered a 
snapshot, not a continuous obligation. 
As discussed more fully in the Section- 
by-Section Analysis addressing the 
amendments to the AML program rules, 
FinCEN does expect financial 
institutions to update this information 
based on risk, generally triggered by a 
financial institution learning through its 
normal monitoring of facts relevant to 
assessing the risk posed by the 
customer. 
The Ownership Prong. Commenters 
raised a number of points regarding the 
ownership prong. Several commenters 
speculated on FinCEN’s intention with 
respect to this requirement. FinCEN 
confirms here that by the phrase 
‘‘directly or indirectly,’’ it intends that 
the financial institution’s customer 
identify its ultimate beneficial owner or 
owners as defined in the rule and not 
their nominees or ‘‘straw men.’’ In 
addition, as described in 
§ 1010.230(b)(2), financial institutions 
may rely on information provided by 
the customer to identify and verify the 
beneficial owner. 
Many commenters supported 
FinCEN’s decision in the proposal to set 
the minimum threshold for equity 
holdings constituting ownership at 25 
percent. Some of these commenters 
requested that FinCEN affirm this 
threshold as the regulatory expectation, 
notwithstanding our remarks in the 
proposal that financial institutions, after 
their own assessment of risk, could 
determine that a lower threshold 
percentage might be warranted. A few 
commenters, however, urged FinCEN to 
lower this threshold to 10 percent, 
contending that the higher threshold 
would be too easy to evade and is 
inconsistent with international AML 
norms and requirements of FATCA, and 
that the burden of a lower threshold 
would be minimal because some 
financial institutions as a matter of 
practice already collect beneficial 
ownership information at thresholds 
lower than 25 percent. 
FinCEN has considered all of the 
arguments in favor of lowering the 
ownership threshold to 10 percent, and 
we decline to make this change in the 
final rule. Although it is true that some 
financial institutions already collect 
beneficial ownership information at a 
threshold lower than 25 percent in some 
cases, we do not believe that this 
practice is widely established enough to 
justify its categorical imposition for all 
legal entity customers across all covered 
financial institutions. As some 
proponents of the 10 percent threshold 
noted, this lower threshold would make 
it more difficult for illicit actors to 
structure ownership interests to evade 
the reporting threshold. However, it 
would also require financial institutions 
to identify and verify as many as eleven 
beneficial owners (including the control 
prong). In FinCEN’s assessment, the 
incremental benefit of this approach 
does not outweigh the burdens 
associated with having to collect and 
verify the identities of more than twice 
as many beneficial owners in some 
circumstances. Furthermore, the 
proposed 25 percent threshold is 
consistent with that of many foreign 
jurisdictions (including EU member 
states) and with the FATF standard, 
which in turn is used to define the 
controlling persons of an entity in the 
intergovernmental agreements that the 
United States has entered into with 
more than 110 other jurisdictions in 
order to enforce the requirements of 
FATCA. FinCEN continues to believe 
that a 25 percent threshold strikes the 
appropriate balance between the benefit 
of identifying key natural persons who 
have substantial ownership interests in 
the legal entity and the costs associated 
with implementing this information- 
collection requirement. 
We reiterate that the 25 percent 
threshold is the baseline regulatory 
benchmark, but that covered financial 
institutions may establish a lower 
percentage threshold for beneficial 
ownership (i.e., one that regards owners 
of less than 25 percent of equity 
interests as beneficial owners) based on 
their own assessment of risk in 
appropriate circumstances. As a general 
matter, FinCEN does not expect covered 
financial institutions’ compliance with 
this regulatory requirement to be 
assessed against a lower threshold. 
Nevertheless, consistent with the risk- 
based approach, FinCEN anticipates that 
some financial institutions may 
determine that they should identify and 
verify beneficial owners at a lower 
threshold in some circumstances; we 
believe that making this clear in the 
note accompanying the regulatory text 
will aid them in doing so with respect 
to their customers. 
Some commenters urged FinCEN to 
include in the ownership prong a 
‘‘fallback provision’’ to require the 
collection of beneficial ownership 
information for at least one individual 
with a significant equity stake in the 
legal entity, even if no beneficial owner 
meets the minimum ownership 
threshold. Such a provision was 
initially discussed in the ANPRM for 
this rulemaking but not included in the 
NPRM in response to concerns 
expressed by numerous commenters 
that the approach was impracticable. As 
we noted in the NPRM, commenters 
questioned the feasibility of engaging in 
a comparative analysis of every owner 
to determine the individual who ‘‘has at 
least as great an equity interest in the 
entity as any other individual.’’ 
Agreeing with that assessment, we 
removed this provision, and we do not 
believe that any benefit from its 
reintroduction would outweigh the 
difficulties that customers and front-line 
employees would face in implementing 
it. Although we have declined to 
include this provision in the final rule, 
financial institutions may determine, 
pursuant to a risk-based approach for 
their institutions, that certain higher 
risk circumstances may warrant the 
collection of beneficial ownership 
information for at least one natural 
person under the ownership prong even 
if no beneficial owner meets the 25 
percent threshold. 
One commenter requested that 
FinCEN clarify whether covered 
financial institutions had an obligation 
to determine whether equity holders of 
a legal entity managed or structured 
their holdings to evade the 25 percent 
threshold for reporting. FinCEN notes 
that in most cases it would be 
impracticable for front-line employees 
to conduct this type of inquiry. Thus, 
FinCEN expects that financial 
institutions will generally be able to rely 
upon information about equity 
ownership provided by the person 
opening the account, and not to 
affirmatively investigate whether equity 
holders are attempting to avoid the 
reporting threshold. However, financial 
institution staff who know, suspect, or 
have reason to suspect that such 
behavior is occurring may, depending 
on the circumstances, be required to file 
a SAR. 
A few commenters sought 
clarification of the definition of ‘‘equity 
interests’’ provided in the proposal—to 
wit, an ownership interest in a business 
entity—contending that although the 
proposed definition provided a great 
VerDate Sep<11>2014 18:50 May 10, 2016 Jkt 238001 PO 00000 Frm 00014 Fmt 4701 Sfmt 4700 E:\FR\FM\11MYR3.SGM 11MYR3mstockstill on DSK3G9T082PROD with RULES3
--- page 10 ---
29411 Federal Register / Vol. 81, No. 91 / Wednesday, May 11, 2016 / Rules and Regulations 
deal of latitude and flexibility, it might 
also cause confusion due to its broad 
sweep. Thus, commenters requested 
greater clarification and guidance in the 
form of examples or additional 
commentary, to assist customers in 
understanding and complying with the 
requirements of the regulation as well as 
employees in their determinations as to 
which types of ownership interests are 
subject to this prong. FinCEN 
appreciates that some financial 
institutions may find it challenging in 
some circumstances to determine 
whether a particular ownership interest 
qualifies as an ‘‘equity interest.’’ 
However, as we noted in the proposal, 
we deliberately avoided the use of more 
technical terms of art associated with 
the exercise of control through 
ownership; we did so in part based on 
the preferences expressed by many 
members of industry. The above- 
mentioned commenters urged FinCEN 
to avoid creating a definition using 
technical and complex legal terms that 
would also be difficult for customers 
and front-line employees to understand 
and apply. Beyond the general examples 
provided in the proposal, however, we 
are reluctant to provide additional 
narrower examples that could be 
construed to limit a definition that we 
intend to be broadly applicable, 
particularly in light of the diversity of 
types of legal entities formed within the 
United States and abroad. By the same 
token, we also decline to provide a 
formal guidance document listing the 
types of documents that front-line 
employees should rely upon to 
demonstrate the existence of an equity 
interest over the triggering threshold. 
We reiterate that it is generally the 
responsibility of the legal entity 
customer (and its personnel) to make 
this determination and to identify the 
beneficial owners, and not front-line 
employees at the financial institution, 
unless the employees have reason to 
question the accuracy of the information 
presented. 
Some commenters noted that while 
they approved of FinCEN’s general 
approach to determining indirect 
ownership of legal entity customers— 
i.e., that FinCEN does not expect 
financial institutions or customers to 
undertake analyses to determine 
whether an individual is a beneficial 
owner under the definition—they 
nevertheless thought that FinCEN 
should provide additional guidance and 
examples of how legal entity customers 
should calculate ownership interests 
when natural persons have indirect 
equity interests. As an initial matter, as 
described above, we emphasize that 
FinCEN expects that financial 
institutions will generally be able to rely 
on the representations of the customer 
when it identifies its beneficial owners. 
We also note that it would not be 
unreasonable to expect that a legal 
entity that has a complex structure 
would have personnel who necessarily 
have a general understanding of the 
ownership interests of the natural 
persons behind it for operational, 
management, accounting, and other 
purposes. 
Commenters also sought clarification 
regarding various scenarios where 25 
percent or greater equity interests of a 
legal entity customer are held in such a 
manner that the interest is not 
ultimately owned, directly or indirectly, 
by any individual. This could occur, for 
example, where a 25 percent or greater 
ownership interest is held by an entity 
excluded from the legal entity customer 
definition under paragraph (e)(2) or by 
a trust. FinCEN notes that the 
exclusions in the proposed rule include 
any entity organized under the laws of 
the United States or of any State at least 
51 percent of whose common stock or 
analogous equity interests are held by 
an entity listed on a U.S stock exchange. 
FinCEN believes that this should 
address the overwhelming majority of 
situations where an excluded entity is a 
25 percent or more shareholder. In 
addition, in the relatively unusual 
situations where an excluded entity 
holds a 25 percent or greater equity 
interest that is not covered by the above- 
mentioned exclusion, FinCEN notes that 
covered financial institutions are not 
required under the ownership prong to 
identify and verify the identities of a 
natural person behind these entities; 
this is because the definition of 
‘‘beneficial owner’’ under the ownership 
prong refers to ‘‘[e]ach individual, if 
any, . . .’’, and in such a case there 
would not be any individual who is the 
ultimate owner of such interest. On the 
other hand, where 25 percent or more of 
the equity interests of a legal entity 
customer are owned by a trust (other 
than a statutory trust), covered financial 
institutions would satisfy the ownership 
prong of the beneficial ownership 
requirement by collecting and verifying 
the identity of the trustee, and FinCEN 
has amended the definition consistent 
with this. For clarity, FinCEN notes that 
in any such case the legal entity 
customer would nonetheless be required 
to identify an individual under the 
control prong. 
The Control Prong. Commenters also 
raised a variety of points regarding this 
element. 
A few commenters requested that we 
narrow or eliminate the control prong, 
contending that it would be difficult to 
identify a control person under such a 
wide-ranging definition. We disagree. 
FinCEN proposed a broad definition to 
give legal entities a wide range of 
options from which to choose. 
Accordingly, the breadth of the 
definition will facilitate, rather than 
hinder, financial institutions’ ability to 
collect this information—because legal 
entity customers are required to provide 
information on only one control person 
who satisfies the definition, legal 
entities should be able to readily 
identify at least one natural person 
within their management structure who 
has significant management 
responsibility, consistent with the 
multiple examples of positions 
provided. Furthermore, there may be 
legal entities for which there are no 
natural persons who satisfy the 
ownership prong; without the control 
prong, this would create a loophole for 
legal entities seeking to obscure their 
beneficial ownership information. 
Requiring the identification and 
verification of, at a minimum, one 
control person ensures that financial 
institutions will have a record of at least 
one natural person associated with the 
legal entity, which will benefit law 
enforcement and regulatory 
investigations for reasons described 
previously. 
A few commenters requested that 
FinCEN provide additional information 
about the types of persons who would 
satisfy the control prong, contending 
that a level of detail similar to the 
explanations provided for the 
ownership prong would be helpful for 
implementation. We believe that such 
additional explanation is unnecessary. 
In contrast with the variety of possible 
complicated scenarios that a financial 
institution might encounter when trying 
to determine beneficial ownership 
under the ownership prong, the control 
prong provides for a straightforward 
test: The legal entity customer must 
provide identifying information for one 
person with significant managerial 
control. It further provides as examples 
a number of common, well-understood 
senior job titles, such as President, Chief 
Executive Officer, and others. Taken 
together, FinCEN believes that these 
clauses provide ample information for 
legal entity customers to easily identify 
a natural person that satisfies the 
definition of control person. 
A few commenters requested that 
FinCEN expand the reach of the control 
prong by, among other things, including 
within it the concept of ‘‘effective 
control,’’ and proposing a variety of 
changes to mandate the identification of 
additional natural persons under this 
VerDate Sep<11>2014 18:50 May 10, 2016 Jkt 238001 PO 00000 Frm 00015 Fmt 4701 Sfmt 4700 E:\FR\FM\11MYR3.SGM 11MYR3mstockstill on DSK3G9T082PROD with RULES3
--- page 11 ---
29419 Federal Register / Vol. 81, No. 91 / Wednesday, May 11, 2016 / Rules and Regulations 
79 In the proposal, we described these elements, 
which we believe to be fundamental to an effective 
AML program, as follows: (i) Identifying and 
verifying the identity of customers; (ii) identifying 
and verifying the identity of beneficial owners of 
legal entity customers (i.e., the natural persons who 
own or control legal entities); (iii) understanding 
the nature and purpose of customer relationships; 
and (iv) conducting ongoing monitoring to maintain 
and update customer information and to identify 
and report suspicious transactions. See 79 FR at 
45152. 
80 31 CFR 1020.320(a)(2)(iii); see also 31 CFR 
1023.320(a)(2)(iii), 1024.320(a)(2)(iii), and 
1026.320(a)(2)(iii). 
81 FFIEC Manual at 57. 
concern, we decline to alter the 
recordkeeping requirement. First, 
because the Certification Form is no 
longer mandatory, financial institutions 
not using it will not have to retain 
multiple Certification Forms, but will 
instead have flexibility to record any 
changes of beneficial ownership 
information in a manner that works best 
for their institution. And we believe the 
benefit from leveraging existing 
procedures far outweighs any benefit 
that might arise from a shorter 
recordkeeping standard, because 
creating a separate standard for 
beneficial ownership information would 
likely require new processes and 
necessitate training for employees, as 
well as require line employees to 
consistently apply different standards 
for beneficial ownership and CIP 
information. 
Section 1010.230(j) Reliance on 
Another Financial Institution. In the 
NPRM, we proposed that financial 
institutions could rely on the 
performance by another financial 
institution of the requirements of this 
section under the same conditions as set 
forth in the applicable CIP rules. 
Commenters raised a few points 
regarding the reliance provision as 
proposed. A few requested that we 
lower the standard for reliance below 
that articulated in the applicable CIP 
rules, by permitting reliance without a 
contract and annual certification, and 
extending the reliance provisions to 
regulated money services businesses 
and foreign affiliates of covered 
financial institutions subject to a global 
standard at least as rigorous as U.S. CIP 
and CDD standards. We decline to make 
any of these proposed changes to the 
reliance provision at this time. FinCEN 
believes that there is significant value to 
financial institutions in terms of 
account management in having uniform 
standards to the greatest extent possible, 
and that having different reliance 
standards for CIP and for beneficial 
ownership information might cause 
confusion and negatively impact 
compliance. Thus, to the extent that we 
would make any of the proposed 
changes to the reliance provision, we 
believe it would be important to make 
the same changes concurrently to the 
applicable CIP provisions, which would 
require joint rulemaking. 
One commenter requested that 
FinCEN clarify reliance responsibilities 
in the drafting of selling, clearing, or 
counterparty agreements, without 
further elaboration upon the type of 
clarification sought or the need for such 
clarification. We have considered this 
request, and in the absence of any 
specific and persuasive arguments 
supporting the need for such 
clarification, we have found no reason 
to provide any clarification addressing 
this issue. 
Another commenter requested that 
FinCEN amend the reliance provision to 
enable covered financial institutions to 
employ the services of non-financial 
institution third parties as beneficial 
ownership pre-check service providers, 
to conduct beneficial ownership due 
diligence. This commenter contended 
that amending the proposal in this way 
might facilitate compliance by 
permitting third parties specializing in 
beneficial ownership due diligence to 
fulfill the requirements of this section at 
scale, expediting legal entities’ ability to 
open accounts. Thus, the commenter 
proposed adding clauses to the reliance 
provision permitting such reliance on 
these third parties if the reliance is 
reasonable; the third party is voluntarily 
subject to a rule implementing 31 U.S.C. 
5318(h) and certified by Treasury or 
FinCEN; and the third party certifies to 
the financial institution that it has 
implemented an AML program and that 
it will perform the requirements of 
section 1010.230. FinCEN declines to 
make these changes. Currently, FinCEN 
does not have an appropriate 
mechanism to permit a third party to 
voluntarily subject itself to an AML 
program requirement, nor to assess and 
certify that party’s compliance. We thus 
believe that it would make more sense 
to postpone any consideration of this 
approach until after FinCEN and the 
covered financial institutions have 
gained experience and understanding 
from implementing section 1010.230. 
Section 1020.210 Anti-money 
laundering program requirements for 
financial institutions regulated only by 
a Federal functional regulator, including 
banks, savings associations, and credit 
unions. In the NPRM, we proposed to 
amend FinCEN’s existing AML program 
rules to expressly incorporate both the 
minimum statutory elements of an AML 
program prescribed by 31 U.S.C. 
5318(h)(1), as well as the elements of 
the minimum standard of CDD that are 
not otherwise already accounted for in 
either the existing AML regulatory 
scheme (i.e., CIP) or in the proposed 
beneficial ownership requirement.
79 
Paragraphs (b)(1) through (4) correspond 
to the minimum statutory elements of 
section 5318(h)(1), while proposed 
paragraph (b)(5) set forth the remaining 
elements of CDD by requiring 
appropriate risk-based procedures for 
conducting ongoing customer due 
diligence including, but not limited to, 
(i) understanding the nature and 
purpose of customer relationships for 
the purpose of developing a customer 
risk profile, and (ii) conducting ongoing 
monitoring to maintain and update 
customer information and to identify 
and report suspicious transactions. We 
described our understanding that these 
third and fourth elements of CDD were 
necessary and critical steps required to 
comply with the existing requirement 
under the BSA to identify and report 
suspicious transactions. Thus, expressly 
incorporating the third and fourth 
elements of CDD into the AML program 
rules would serve to harmonize these 
elements with existing AML obligations. 
Because the proposal sought only to 
clarify and explicitly state existing 
expectations and requirements, we 
emphasized that the proposal was not 
intended to lower, reduce, or limit the 
due diligence expectations of the 
Federal functional regulators or limit 
their existing regulatory discretion, nor 
to create any new obligations. 
With respect to the third element, 
understanding the nature and purpose 
of customer relationships for the 
purpose of developing a customer risk 
profile, we elaborated upon our 
understanding of the manner in which 
current expectations satisfied this 
proposed requirement. We observed that 
under the existing requirement for 
financial institutions to report 
suspicious activity, they must file SARs 
on a transaction that, among other 
things, has ‘‘no business or apparent 
lawful purpose or is not the sort in 
which the particular customer would 
normally be expected to engage.’’
80 
Banks specifically are expected to 
‘‘obtain information at account opening 
sufficient to develop an understanding 
of normal and expected activity for the 
customer’s occupation or business 
operations.’’
81 In short, to understand 
the types of transactions in which a 
particular customer would normally be 
expected to engage necessarily requires 
an understanding of the nature and 
purpose of the customer relationship, 
which informs the baseline against 
which aberrant, suspicious transactions 
are identified. It was this fundamental 
VerDate Sep<11>2014 18:50 May 10, 2016 Jkt 238001 PO 00000 Frm 00023 Fmt 4701 Sfmt 4700 E:\FR\FM\11MYR3.SGM 11MYR3mstockstill on DSK3G9T082PROD with RULES3
--- page 12 ---
29420 Federal Register / Vol. 81, No. 91 / Wednesday, May 11, 2016 / Rules and Regulations 
82 Id. at 29–30. 
83 As noted above, the Secretary has delegated to 
the Director of FinCEN the authority to implement 
the BSA and associated regulations. 
expectation that FinCEN sought to 
encapsulate in its articulation of the 
third element. Moreover, as FinCEN 
stated in the proposal, in some 
circumstances an understanding of the 
nature and purpose of a customer 
relationship can also be developed by 
inherent or self-evident information 
about the product or customer type, 
such as the type of customer, the type 
of account opened, or the service or 
product offered, or other basic 
information about the customer, and 
such information may be sufficient to 
understand the nature and purpose of 
the relationship. We further noted that, 
depending on the facts and 
circumstances, other relevant facts 
could include basic information about 
the customer, such as annual income, 
net worth, domicile, or principal 
occupation or business, as well as, in 
the case of longstanding customers, the 
customer’s history of activity. 
Regarding the fourth element, 
conducting ongoing monitoring to 
maintain and update customer 
information and to identify and report 
suspicious transactions, we noted our 
understanding that, as with the third 
element, current industry practice to 
comply with existing expectations for 
SAR reporting should already satisfy 
this proposed requirement. Banks are 
expected to have in place internal 
controls to ‘‘provide sufficient controls 
and monitoring systems for timely 
detection and reporting of suspicious 
activity.’’
82 In short, the proposal 
served to codify existing supervisory 
and regulatory expectations for banks as 
explicit requirements within FinCEN’s 
AML program requirement in order to 
make clear that the minimum standards 
of CDD, as articulated, include ongoing 
monitoring of all transactions by, at, or 
through the financial institution. As 
proposed, the obligation to update 
customer information as a result of 
monitoring would generally only be 
triggered when the financial institution 
becomes aware of information about the 
customer in the course of normal 
monitoring relevant to assessing the risk 
posed by a customer; it was not 
intended to impose a categorical 
requirement to update customer 
information on a continuous or ongoing 
basis using the Certification Form in 
Appendix A or by another means. 
Commenters raised a number of 
points about FinCEN’s proposal to 
expressly incorporate the third and 
fourth elements of CDD as a ‘‘fifth 
pillar’’ into the AML program rules. 
Some questioned whether FinCEN had 
the statutory authority to adopt these 
amendments to the program rules. A 
few commenters expressed general 
approval of this approach but sought 
clarification of its application, while 
other commenters opposed the 
codification of existing regulatory 
expectations, questioning the need to do 
so in light of current regulatory 
expectations. Some commenters raised 
concerns about FinCEN’s articulation of 
the ongoing monitoring requirement, 
contending that the element as proposed 
imposed an obligation to continuously 
update customer information. We 
address these comments and provide 
additional clarification for banks below. 
A few commenters challenged 
FinCEN’s statutory authority to amend 
the AML program rules in this fashion. 
They argued principally that FinCEN’s 
actions exceeded the scope of its 
statutory authority because it proposed 
to incorporate into the regulations 
implementing the AML program, 
elements not found in the authorizing 
statute, 31 U.S.C. 5318(h). This 
argument is not supported by a plain 
reading of the statutory text. Section 
5318(h)(1) provides in relevant part that 
‘‘each financial institution shall 
establish anti-money laundering 
programs, including, at a minimum— 
[the four statutory pillars]. . . .’’ 
(emphasis added). And section 
5318(h)(2) further provides that ‘‘[t]he 
Secretary of the Treasury, after 
consultation with the appropriate 
Federal functional regulator . . . may 
prescribe minimum standards for 
programs established under paragraph 
(1). . . .’’ The first clause by its terms 
does not limit an AML program 
exclusively to the four enumerated 
statutory elements, and the statutory 
scheme clearly vests the Secretary
83 
with discretion to adapt the AML 
program to changing circumstances as 
warranted after consultation with the 
Federal functional regulators. FinCEN’s 
actions today fall squarely within the 
scope of its statutory delegation of 
authority from the Secretary and the 
plain language of Section 5318(h)(1). 
One commenter asserted that the 
creation of this new ‘‘fifth pillar’’ 
separate from the other elements of CDD 
that are already incorporated into the 
‘‘internal controls’’ pillar, could 
complicate how existing internal 
controls are identified and managed, 
possibly requiring the revision of 
existing systems and programs, 
including training and audit functions, 
thereby needlessly consuming banks’ 
AML resources. As described at greater 
length above and below, FinCEN views 
the fifth pillar as nothing more than an 
explicit codification of existing 
expectations; as these expectations 
should already be taken into account in 
a bank’s internal controls, FinCEN 
would expect the confusion caused by 
this codification, if any, to be minimal. 
Furthermore, FinCEN believes that, in 
order to bring uniformity and 
consistency across sectors, it is 
important that these due diligence 
elements be made explicit, and that they 
be part of the AML program of 
depository institutions (as well as of the 
other covered financial institutions). We 
believe that harmonizing these 
requirements across financial sectors 
will strengthen the system as a whole, 
by further limiting opportunities for 
inconsistent application of unclear or 
unexpressed expectations. The same 
commenter also asserted that imposing 
this requirement unilaterally ‘‘places 
FinCEN at odds with the prudential 
regulators.’’ However, FinCEN notes 
that the proposed CDD rule as well as 
this final rule, were issued after 
consultation with the staffs of the 
prudential regulators. 
Most bank commenters did not raise 
objections to the concept of a customer 
risk profile. The banks that commented 
on this issue noted generally that they 
understood the concept as it applied to 
their industry. One commenter subject 
to AML requirements for banks, broker- 
dealers, mutual funds, and insurance 
companies raised concerns that the 
concept of a customer risk profile 
implicated personal privacy interests 
and that information about personal 
attributes of customers could be used for 
inappropriate profiling. We reiterate 
here that for banks, the term ‘‘customer 
risk profile’’ is used to refer to the 
information gathered about a customer 
to develop the baseline against which 
customer activity is assessed for 
suspicious transaction reporting. As 
such, we would not expect there to be 
any significant changes to current 
practice that is consistent with existing 
expectations and requirements, and 
certainly not in the form of 
inappropriate profiling. 
A few commenters raised objections 
to the ongoing monitoring element in 
the proposal, contending that, as 
articulated, it was inconsistent with 
current requirements or expectations 
regarding the monitoring of customers 
and transactions and appeared to 
impose a new requirement to monitor, 
maintain, and update customer 
information on a continuous basis. 
Commenters also requested that FinCEN 
clarify the relationship between ongoing 
monitoring and updating beneficial 
VerDate Sep<11>2014 18:50 May 10, 2016 Jkt 238001 PO 00000 Frm 00024 Fmt 4701 Sfmt 4700 E:\FR\FM\11MYR3.SGM 11MYR3mstockstill on DSK3G9T082PROD with RULES3
--- page 13 ---
29421 Federal Register / Vol. 81, No. 91 / Wednesday, May 11, 2016 / Rules and Regulations 
84 The same changes are being made to the 
ongoing monitoring provisions of the AML program 
rules for the other covered financial institutions. 
85 As we noted in the proposal, FinCEN’s current 
AML program rule for broker-dealers differs from 
the current program rule issued by FINRA, 
principally because FINRA has included as a pillar 
within its AML program rule a requirement with 
respect to suspicious activity reporting. This 
integrated treatment of the SAR requirement also 
differs from the practice of the other financial 
sectors covered by this rulemaking. We reiterate 
that FinCEN is not proposing to incorporate, as 
FINRA has done, a SAR reporting requirement as 
a separate pillar within the AML program rules, as 
the existing stand-alone SAR obligation within 
FinCEN’s regulations is sufficient. However, the 
decision to not include a SAR requirement within 
the program rules is not meant to affect its 
treatment in any way within the FINRA rule. 
ownership information, asserting that 
the expectation articulated in the 
proposal that financial institutions 
should update beneficial ownership 
information in connection with ongoing 
monitoring was unclear. As we noted in 
the proposal and above, the purpose of 
articulating the requirement regarding 
updating customer information was to 
codify existing practice relating to 
ongoing monitoring, and not to impose 
a new categorical requirement to 
continuously update customer 
information. However, we agree with 
the commenters that this element as 
presented in the proposal could be 
construed in this fashion. Thus, the 
final rule amends the ongoing 
monitoring prong to state that ongoing 
monitoring is conducted to identify and 
report suspicious transactions and, on a 
risk basis, to maintain and update 
customer information. For these 
purposes, customer information shall 
include information regarding the 
beneficial owners of legal entity 
customers (as defined in § 1010.230). 
We believe that this change to the 
ongoing monitoring clause better 
encapsulates current practice in the 
AML/CFT area, and therefore, the 
nature of the obligation—that is, 
financial institutions are presently 
expected to conduct a monitoring- 
triggered update of customer 
information when they detect 
information during the course of their 
normal monitoring relevant to assessing 
or reevaluating the risk of a customer 
relationship. Such information could 
include, e.g., a significant and 
unexplained change in customer 
activity. It could also include 
information indicating a possible 
change in beneficial ownership, when 
such change might be relevant to 
assessing the risk posed by the 
customer. In any such event, it is 
appropriate to update the customer 
information accordingly. As we noted in 
the proposal, including the ongoing 
monitoring element in the AML 
program rules serves to reflect existing 
practices to satisfy SAR reporting 
obligations. Although the beneficial 
ownership information collection 
requirement was not in place at the time 
of the proposal, this information may be 
relevant in assessing the risk posed by 
the customer and in assessing whether 
a transaction is suspicious. Moreover, 
FinCEN believes it is also consistent 
that this updating requirement should 
apply not only to customers with new 
accounts, but also to customers with 
accounts existing on the Applicability 
Date. That is, should the financial 
institution learn as a result of its normal 
monitoring that the beneficial owner of 
a legal entity customer may have 
changed, it should identify the 
beneficial owner of such customer. For 
example, we can envision a situation 
where an unexpected transfer of all of 
the funds in a legal entity’s account to 
a previously unknown individual would 
trigger an investigation in which the 
bank learns that the funds transfer was 
directly related to a change in the 
beneficial ownership of the legal 
entity.
84 FinCEN emphasizes that the 
obligation to update customer 
information pursuant to this provision, 
including beneficial ownership 
information, is triggered only when, in 
the course of its normal monitoring, the 
financial institution detects information 
relevant to assessing the risk posed by 
the customer; it is not intended to 
impose a categorical requirement to 
update customer or beneficial 
ownership information on a continuous 
or ongoing basis. 
One commenter asserted that it would 
be difficult to conceive of a scenario 
where the ongoing monitoring of 
transactions would provide information 
to a financial institution indicating a 
potential change in beneficial 
ownership. Accordingly, the commenter 
suggested that we link the expectation 
to update beneficial ownership 
information only to monitoring of the 
customer relationship. We generally 
agree with the notion that it is unlikely 
that transaction monitoring will uncover 
information suggestive of a change of 
beneficial ownership, because such 
monitoring generally does not tend to 
provide insight into the transfer of 
ownership or operational control. 
Nevertheless, we do not believe that a 
categorical exclusion of beneficial 
ownership information from this 
element would be appropriate. First, 
FinCEN believes that the revision of the 
ongoing monitoring element for the final 
rule as described above largely 
addresses this concern—as we have 
noted repeatedly, our requirement is 
consistent with current practice, and we 
expect monitoring-triggered updating of 
beneficial ownership information (as 
with other customer information) only 
to occur on a risk basis when material 
information about a change in beneficial 
ownership is uncovered during the 
course of a bank’s normal monitoring 
(whether of the customer relationship or 
of transactions). As noted in the 
preceding paragraph, there may be 
unusual cases where transaction 
monitoring might lead to information 
about a possible change in beneficial 
ownership, and we are therefore 
unwilling to categorically foreclose this 
avenue of inquiry. However, there is no 
expectation that a financial institution 
obtain updated beneficial ownership 
information from its customers on a 
regular basis, whether by using the 
Certification Form in Appendix A or by 
any other means. 
This commenter also expressed 
concern about subjecting all account 
relationships to the requirement to 
monitor to identify and report 
suspicious transactions, contending that 
this implied a uniform requirement for 
monitoring transactions that was 
inconsistent with the risk-based 
approach. Therefore, the commenter 
requested that FinCEN expressly 
articulate that ongoing monitoring be 
conducted pursuant to the risk-based 
approach. We clarify first that our 
expectation that all accounts be subject 
to ongoing monitoring does not mean 
that we expect all accounts to be subject 
to a uniform level of scrutiny. Rather, 
we fully expect financial institutions to 
apply the risk-based approach in 
determining the level of monitoring to 
which each account will be subjected. 
Thus, consistent with current practice, 
we would expect the level of monitoring 
to vary across accounts based on the 
financial institution’s assessment of the 
risk associated with the customer and 
the account. We also noted that all 
account relationships would be subject 
to this requirement merely to reflect the 
fact that all accounts must necessarily 
be monitored in some form in order to 
comply with existing SAR requirements, 
and not only those subject to the CIP 
rule. 
Section 1023.210 Anti-money 
laundering program requirements for 
brokers or dealers in securities. The 
structural changes to this section, as 
well as the rationale for these 
amendments, are identical to those 
articulated for banks above.
85 
As in the case of banks described 
above, FinCEN emphasizes that the 
incorporation of these elements is 
VerDate Sep<11>2014 18:50 May 10, 2016 Jkt 238001 PO 00000 Frm 00025 Fmt 4701 Sfmt 4700 E:\FR\FM\11MYR3.SGM 11MYR3mstockstill on DSK3G9T082PROD with RULES3