
29 CFR Part 541 - Exemptions for Executive, Administrative, Professional, Computer and Outside Sales Employees
==============================================================================================================


§ 541.100 General rule for executive employees.
-----------------------------------------------

(a) The term “employee employed in a bona fide executive capacity” in section 13(a)(1) of
the Act shall mean any employee:

(1) Compensated on a salary basis pursuant to § 541.600 at a rate of not less than $684 per
week (or $455 per week if employed in the Commonwealth of the Northern Mariana Islands,
Guam, Puerto Rico, or the U.S. Virgin Islands by employers other than the Federal
government, or $380 per week if employed in American Samoa by employers other than the
Federal government), exclusive of board, lodging or other facilities;

(2) Whose primary duty is management of the enterprise in which the employee is employed or
of a customarily recognized department or subdivision thereof;

(3) Who customarily and regularly directs the work of two or more other employees; and

(4) Who has the authority to hire or fire other employees or whose suggestions and
recommendations as to the hiring, firing, advancement, promotion or any other change of
status of other employees are given particular weight.

(b) The phrase “salary basis” is defined at § 541.602; “board, lodging or other facilities”
is defined at § 541.606; “primary duty” is defined at § 541.700; and “customarily and
regularly” is defined at § 541.701.


----------------------------------------------------------------------


§ 541.101 Business owner.
-------------------------

The term “employee employed in a bona fide executive capacity” in section 13(a)(1) of the
Act also includes any employee who owns at least a bona fide 20-percent equity interest in
the enterprise in which the employee is employed, regardless of whether the business is a
corporate or other type of organization, and who is actively engaged in its management. The
term “management” is defined in § 541.102. The requirements of Subpart G (salary
requirements) of this part do not apply to the business owners described in this section.


----------------------------------------------------------------------


§ 541.102 Management.
---------------------

Generally, “management” includes, but is not limited to, activities such as interviewing,
selecting, and training of employees; setting and adjusting their rates of pay and hours of
work; directing the work of employees; maintaining production or sales records for use in
supervision or control; appraising employees' productivity and efficiency for the purpose of
recommending promotions or other changes in status; handling employee complaints and
grievances; disciplining employees; planning the work; determining the techniques to be
used; apportioning the work among the employees; determining the type of materials,
supplies, machinery, equipment or tools to be used or merchandise to be bought, stocked and
sold; controlling the flow and distribution of materials or merchandise and supplies;
providing for the safety and security of the employees or the property; planning and
controlling the budget; and monitoring or implementing legal compliance measures.


----------------------------------------------------------------------


§ 541.200 General rule for administrative employees.
----------------------------------------------------

(a) The term “employee employed in a bona fide administrative capacity” in section 13(a)(1)
of the Act shall mean any employee:

(1) Compensated on a salary or fee basis pursuant to § 541.600 at a rate of not less than
$684 per week (or $455 per week if employed in the Commonwealth of the Northern Mariana
Islands, Guam, Puerto Rico, or the U.S. Virgin Islands by employers other than the Federal
government, or $380 per week if employed in American Samoa by employers other than the
Federal government), exclusive of board, lodging or other facilities;

(2) Whose primary duty is the performance of office or non-manual work directly related to
the management or general business operations of the employer or the employer's customers;
and

(3) Whose primary duty includes the exercise of discretion and independent judgment with
respect to matters of significance.

(b) The term “salary basis” is defined at § 541.602; “fee basis” is defined at § 541.605;
“board, lodging or other facilities” is defined at § 541.606; and “primary duty” is defined
at § 541.700.


----------------------------------------------------------------------


§ 541.202 Discretion and independent judgment.
----------------------------------------------

(a) To qualify for the administrative exemption, an employee's primary duty must include the
exercise of discretion and independent judgment with respect to matters of significance. In
general, the exercise of discretion and independent judgment involves the comparison and the
evaluation of possible courses of conduct, and acting or making a decision after the various
possibilities have been considered. The term “matters of significance” refers to the level
of importance or consequence of the work performed.

(b) The phrase “discretion and independent judgment” must be applied in the light of all the
facts involved in the particular employment situation in which the question arises. Factors
to consider when determining whether an employee exercises discretion and independent
judgment with respect to matters of significance include, but are not limited to: whether
the employee has authority to formulate, affect, interpret, or implement management policies
or operating practices; whether the employee carries out major assignments in conducting the
operations of the business; whether the employee performs work that affects business
operations to a substantial degree, even if the employee's assignments are related to
operation of a particular segment of the business; whether the employee has authority to
commit the employer in matters that have significant financial impact; whether the employee
has authority to waive or deviate from established policies and procedures without prior
approval; whether the employee has authority to negotiate and bind the company on
significant matters; whether the employee provides consultation or expert advice to
management; whether the employee is involved in planning long- or short-term business
objectives; whether the employee investigates and resolves matters of significance on behalf
of management; and whether the employee represents the company in handling complaints,
arbitrating disputes or resolving grievances.

(c) The exercise of discretion and independent judgment implies that the employee has
authority to make an independent choice, free from immediate direction or supervision.
However, employees can exercise discretion and independent judgment even if their decisions
or recommendations are reviewed at a higher level. Thus, the term “discretion and
independent judgment” does not require that the decisions made by an employee have a
finality that goes with unlimited authority and a complete absence of review. The decisions
made as a result of the exercise of discretion and independent judgment may consist of
recommendations for action rather than the actual taking of action. The fact that an
employee's decision may be subject to review and that upon occasion the decisions are
revised or reversed after review does not mean that the employee is not exercising
discretion and independent judgment. For example, the policies formulated by the credit
manager of a large corporation may be subject to review by higher company officials who may
approve or disapprove these policies. The management consultant who has made a study of the
operations of a business and who has drawn a proposed change in organization may have the
plan reviewed or revised by superiors before it is submitted to the client.

(d) An employer's volume of business may make it necessary to employ a number of employees
to perform the same or similar work. The fact that many employees perform identical work or
work of the same relative importance does not mean that the work of each such employee does
not involve the exercise of discretion and independent judgment with respect to matters of
significance.

(e) The exercise of discretion and independent judgment must be more than the use of skill
in applying well-established techniques, procedures or specific standards described in
manuals or other sources. See also § 541.704 regarding use of manuals. The exercise of
discretion and independent judgment also does not include clerical or secretarial work,
recording or tabulating data, or performing other mechanical, repetitive, recurrent or
routine work. An employee who simply tabulates data is not exempt, even if labeled as a
“statistician.”

(f) An employee does not exercise discretion and independent judgment with respect to
matters of significance merely because the employer will experience financial losses if the
employee fails to perform the job properly. For example, a messenger who is entrusted with
carrying large sums of money does not exercise discretion and independent judgment with
respect to matters of significance even though serious consequences may flow from the
employee's neglect. Similarly, an employee who operates very expensive equipment does not
exercise discretion and independent judgment with respect to matters of significance merely
because improper performance of the employee's duties may cause serious financial loss to
the employer.


----------------------------------------------------------------------


§ 541.203 Administrative exemption examples.
--------------------------------------------

(a) Insurance claims adjusters generally meet the duties requirements for the administrative
exemption, whether they work for an insurance company or other type of company, if their
duties include activities such as interviewing insureds, witnesses and physicians;
inspecting property damage; reviewing factual information to prepare damage estimates;
evaluating and making recommendations regarding coverage of claims; determining liability
and total value of a claim; negotiating settlements; and making recommendations regarding
litigation.

(b) Employees in the financial services industry generally meet the duties requirements for
the administrative exemption if their duties include work such as collecting and analyzing
information regarding the customer's income, assets, investments or debts; determining which
financial products best meet the customer's needs and financial circumstances; advising the
customer regarding the advantages and disadvantages of different financial products; and
marketing, servicing or promoting the employer's financial products. However, an employee
whose primary duty is selling financial products does not qualify for the administrative
exemption.

(c) An employee who leads a team of other employees assigned to complete major projects for
the employer (such as purchasing, selling or closing all or part of the business,
negotiating a real estate transaction or a collective bargaining agreement, or designing and
implementing productivity improvements) generally meets the duties requirements for the
administrative exemption, even if the employee does not have direct supervisory
responsibility over the other employees on the team.

(d) An executive assistant or administrative assistant to a business owner or senior
executive of a large business generally meets the duties requirements for the administrative
exemption if such employee, without specific instructions or prescribed procedures, has been
delegated authority regarding matters of significance.

(e) Human resources managers who formulate, interpret or implement employment policies and
management consultants who study the operations of a business and propose changes in
organization generally meet the duties requirements for the administrative exemption.
However, personnel clerks who “screen” applicants to obtain data regarding their minimum
qualifications and fitness for employment generally do not meet the duties requirements for
the administrative exemption. Such personnel clerks typically will reject all applicants who
do not meet minimum standards for the particular job or for employment by the company. The
minimum standards are usually set by the exempt human resources manager or other company
officials, and the decision to hire from the group of qualified applicants who do meet the
minimum standards is similarly made by the exempt human resources manager or other company
officials. Thus, when the interviewing and screening functions are performed by the human
resources manager or personnel manager who makes the hiring decision or makes
recommendations for hiring from the pool of qualified applicants, such duties constitute
exempt work, even though routine, because this work is directly and closely related to the
employee's exempt functions.

(f) Purchasing agents with authority to bind the company on significant purchases generally
meet the duties requirements for the administrative exemption even if they must consult with
top management officials when making a purchase commitment for raw materials in excess of
the contemplated plant needs.

(g) Ordinary inspection work generally does not meet the duties requirements for the
administrative exemption. Inspectors normally perform specialized work along standardized
lines involving well-established techniques and procedures which may have been catalogued
and described in manuals or other sources. Such inspectors rely on techniques and skills
acquired by special training or experience. They have some leeway in the performance of
their work but only within closely prescribed limits.

(h) Employees usually called examiners or graders, such as employees that grade lumber,
generally do not meet the duties requirements for the administrative exemption. Such
employees usually perform work involving the comparison of products with established
standards which are frequently catalogued. Often, after continued reference to the written
standards, or through experience, the employee acquires sufficient knowledge so that
reference to written standards is unnecessary. The substitution of the employee's memory for
a manual of standards does not convert the character of the work performed to exempt work
requiring the exercise of discretion and independent judgment.

(i) Comparison shopping performed by an employee of a retail store who merely reports to the
buyer the prices at a competitor's store does not qualify for the administrative exemption.
However, the buyer who evaluates such reports on competitor prices to set the employer's
prices generally meets the duties requirements for the administrative exemption.

(j) Public sector inspectors or investigators of various types, such as fire prevention or
safety, building or construction, health or sanitation, environmental or soils specialists
and similar employees, generally do not meet the duties requirements for the administrative
exemption because their work typically does not involve work directly related to the
management or general business operations of the employer. Such employees also do not
qualify for the administrative exemption because their work involves the use of skills and
technical abilities in gathering factual information, applying known standards or prescribed
procedures, determining which procedure to follow, or determining whether prescribed
standards or criteria are met.


----------------------------------------------------------------------


§ 541.300 General rule for professional employees.
--------------------------------------------------

(a) The term “employee employed in a bona fide professional capacity” in section 13(a)(1) of
the Act shall mean any employee:

(1) Compensated on a salary or fee basis pursuant to § 541.600 at a rate of not less than
$684 per week (or $455 per week if employed in the Commonwealth of the Northern Mariana
Islands, Guam, Puerto Rico, or the U.S. Virgin Islands by employers other than the Federal
government, or $380 per week if employed in American Samoa by employers other than the
Federal government), exclusive of board, lodging or other facilities; and

(2) Whose primary duty is the performance of work:

(i) Requiring knowledge of an advanced type in a field of science or learning customarily
acquired by a prolonged course of specialized intellectual instruction; or

(ii) Requiring invention, imagination, originality or talent in a recognized field of
artistic or creative endeavor.

(b) The term “salary basis” is defined at § 541.602; “fee basis” is defined at § 541.605;
“board, lodging or other facilities” is defined at § 541.606; and “primary duty” is defined
at § 541.700.


----------------------------------------------------------------------


§ 541.301 Learned professionals.
--------------------------------

(a) To qualify for the learned professional exemption, an employee's primary duty must be
the performance of work requiring advanced knowledge in a field of science or learning
customarily acquired by a prolonged course of specialized intellectual instruction. This
primary duty test includes three elements:

(1) The employee must perform work requiring advanced knowledge;

(2) The advanced knowledge must be in a field of science or learning; and

(3) The advanced knowledge must be customarily acquired by a prolonged course of specialized
intellectual instruction.

(b) The phrase “work requiring advanced knowledge” means work which is predominantly
intellectual in character, and which includes work requiring the consistent exercise of
discretion and judgment, as distinguished from performance of routine mental, manual,
mechanical or physical work. An employee who performs work requiring advanced knowledge
generally uses the advanced knowledge to analyze, interpret or make deductions from varying
facts or circumstances. Advanced knowledge cannot be attained at the high school level.

(c) The phrase “field of science or learning” includes the traditional professions of law,
medicine, theology, accounting, actuarial computation, engineering, architecture, teaching,
various types of physical, chemical and biological sciences, pharmacy and other similar
occupations that have a recognized professional status as distinguished from the mechanical
arts or skilled trades where in some instances the knowledge is of a fairly advanced type,
but is not in a field of science or learning.

(d) The phrase “customarily acquired by a prolonged course of specialized intellectual
instruction” restricts the exemption to professions where specialized academic training is a
standard prerequisite for entrance into the profession. The best prima facie evidence that
an employee meets this requirement is possession of the appropriate academic degree.
However, the word “customarily” means that the exemption is also available to employees in
such professions who have substantially the same knowledge level and perform substantially
the same work as the degreed employees, but who attained the advanced knowledge through a
combination of work experience and intellectual instruction. Thus, for example, the learned
professional exemption is available to the occasional lawyer who has not gone to law school,
or the occasional chemist who is not the possessor of a degree in chemistry. However, the
learned professional exemption is not available for occupations that customarily may be
performed with only the general knowledge acquired by an academic degree in any field, with
knowledge acquired through an apprenticeship, or with training in the performance of routine
mental, manual, mechanical or physical processes. The learned professional exemption also
does not apply to occupations in which most employees have acquired their skill by
experience rather than by advanced specialized intellectual instruction.

(e)(1) Registered or certified medical technologists. Registered or certified medical
technologists who have successfully completed three academic years of pre-professional study
in an accredited college or university plus a fourth year of professional course work in a
school of medical technology approved by the Council of Medical Education of the American
Medical Association generally meet the duties requirements for the learned professional
exemption.

(2) Nurses. Registered nurses who are registered by the appropriate State examining board
generally meet the duties requirements for the learned professional exemption. Licensed
practical nurses and other similar health care employees, however, generally do not qualify
as exempt learned professionals because possession of a specialized advanced academic degree
is not a standard prerequisite for entry into such occupations.

(3) Dental hygienists. Dental hygienists who have successfully completed four academic years
of pre-professional and professional study in an accredited college or university approved
by the Commission on Accreditation of Dental and Dental Auxiliary Educational Programs of
the American Dental Association generally meet the duties requirements for the learned
professional exemption.

(4) Physician assistants. Physician assistants who have successfully completed four academic
years of pre-professional and professional study, including graduation from a physician
assistant program accredited by the Accreditation Review Commission on Education for the
Physician Assistant, and who are certified by the National Commission on Certification of
Physician Assistants generally meet the duties requirements for the learned professional
exemption.

(5) Accountants. Certified public accountants generally meet the duties requirements for the
learned professional exemption. In addition, many other accountants who are not certified
public accountants but perform similar job duties may qualify as exempt learned
professionals. However, accounting clerks, bookkeepers and other employees who normally
perform a great deal of routine work generally will not qualify as exempt professionals.

(6) Chefs. Chefs, such as executive chefs and sous chefs, who have attained a four-year
specialized academic degree in a culinary arts program, generally meet the duties
requirements for the learned professional exemption. The learned professional exemption is
not available to cooks who perform predominantly routine mental, manual, mechanical or
physical work.

(7) Paralegals. Paralegals and legal assistants generally do not qualify as exempt learned
professionals because an advanced specialized academic degree is not a standard prerequisite
for entry into the field. Although many paralegals possess general four-year advanced
degrees, most specialized paralegal programs are two-year associate degree programs from a
community college or equivalent institution. However, the learned professional exemption is
available for paralegals who possess advanced specialized degrees in other professional
fields and apply advanced knowledge in that field in the performance of their duties. For
example, if a law firm hires an engineer as a paralegal to provide expert advice on product
liability cases or to assist on patent matters, that engineer would qualify for exemption.

(8) Athletic trainers. Athletic trainers who have successfully completed four academic years
of pre-professional and professional study in a specialized curriculum accredited by the
Commission on Accreditation of Allied Health Education Programs and who are certified by the
Board of Certification of the National Athletic Trainers Association Board of Certification
generally meet the duties requirements for the learned professional exemption.

(9) Funeral directors or embalmers. Licensed funeral directors and embalmers who are
licensed by and working in a state that requires successful completion of four academic
years of pre-professional and professional study, including graduation from a college of
mortuary science accredited by the American Board of Funeral Service Education, generally
meet the duties requirements for the learned professional exemption.

(f) The areas in which the professional exemption may be available are expanding. As
knowledge is developed, academic training is broadened and specialized degrees are offered
in new and diverse fields, thus creating new specialists in particular fields of science or
learning. When an advanced specialized degree has become a standard requirement for a
particular occupation, that occupation may have acquired the characteristics of a learned
profession. Accrediting and certifying organizations similar to those listed in paragraphs
(e)(1), (e)(3), (e)(4), (e)(8) and (e)(9) of this section also may be created in the future.
Such organizations may develop similar specialized curriculums and certification programs
which, if a standard requirement for a particular occupation, may indicate that the
occupation has acquired the characteristics of a learned profession.


----------------------------------------------------------------------


§ 541.600 Amount of salary required.
------------------------------------

(a) To qualify as an exempt executive, administrative or professional employee under section
13(a)(1) of the Act, an employee must be compensated on a salary basis at a rate of not less
than $684 per week (or $455 per week if employed in the Commonwealth of the Northern Mariana
Islands, Guam, Puerto Rico, or the U.S. Virgin Islands by employers other than the Federal
Government, or $380 per week if employed in American Samoa by employers other than the
Federal Government), exclusive of board, lodging or other facilities. Administrative and
professional employees may also be paid on a fee basis, as defined in § 541.605.

(b) The required amount of compensation per week may be translated into equivalent amounts
for periods longer than one week. For example, the $684-per-week requirement will be met if
the employee is compensated biweekly on a salary basis of not less than $1,368, semimonthly
on a salary basis of not less than $1,482, or monthly on a salary basis of not less than
$2,964. However, the shortest period of payment that will meet this compensation requirement
is one week.

(c) In the case of academic administrative employees, the compensation requirement also may
be met by compensation on a salary basis at a rate at least equal to the entrance salary for
teachers in the educational establishment by which the employee is employed, as provided in
§ 541.204(a)(1).

(d) In the case of computer employees, the compensation requirement also may be met by
compensation on an hourly basis at a rate not less than $27.63 an hour, as provided in §
541.400(b).

(e) In the case of professional employees, the compensation requirements in this section
shall not apply to employees engaged as teachers (see § 541.303); employees who hold a valid
license or certificate permitting the practice of law or medicine or any of their branches
and are actually engaged in the practice thereof (see § 541.304); or to employees who hold
the requisite academic degree for the general practice of medicine and are engaged in an
internship or resident program pursuant to the practice of the profession (see § 541.304).
In the case of medical occupations, the exception from the salary or fee requirement does
not apply to pharmacists, nurses, therapists, technologists, sanitarians, dietitians, social
workers, psychologists, psychometrists, or other professions which service the medical
profession.


----------------------------------------------------------------------


§ 541.601 Highly compensated employees.
---------------------------------------

(a)(1) Beginning on January 1, 2020, an employee with total annual compensation of at least
$107,432 is deemed exempt under section 13(a)(1) of the Act if the employee customarily and
regularly performs any one or more of the exempt duties or responsibilities of an executive,
administrative or professional employee as identified in subparts B, C or D of this part.

(2) Where the annual period covers periods both prior to and after January 1, 2020, the
amount of total annual compensation due will be determined on a proportional basis.

(b)(1) “Total annual compensation” must include at least $684 per week paid on a salary or
fee basis as set forth in §§ 541.602 and 541.605, except that § 541.602(a)(3) shall not
apply to highly compensated employees. Total annual compensation may also include
commissions, nondiscretionary bonuses and other nondiscretionary compensation earned during
a 52-week period. Total annual compensation does not include board, lodging and other
facilities as defined in § 541.606, and does not include payments for medical insurance,
payments for life insurance, contributions to retirement plans and the cost of other fringe
benefits.

(2) If an employee's total annual compensation does not total at least the amount specified
in the applicable subsection of paragraph (a) by the last pay period of the 52-week period,
the employer may, during the last pay period or within one month after the end of the
52-week period, make one final payment sufficient to achieve the required level. For
example, for a 52-week period beginning January 1, 2020, an employee may earn $90,000 in
base salary, and the employer may anticipate based upon past sales that the employee also
will earn $17,432 in commissions. However, due to poor sales in the final quarter of the
year, the employee actually only earns $12,000 in commissions. In this situation, the
employer may within one month after the end of the year make a payment of at least $5,432 to
the employee. Any such final payment made after the end of the 52-week period may count only
toward the prior year's total annual compensation and not toward the total annual
compensation in the year it was paid. If the employer fails to make such a payment, the
employee does not qualify as a highly compensated employee, but may still qualify as exempt
under subparts B, C, or D of this part.

(3) An employee who does not work a full year for the employer, either because the employee
is newly hired after the beginning of the year or ends the employment before the end of the
year, may qualify for exemption under this section if the employee receives a pro rata
portion of the minimum amount established in paragraph (a) of this section, based upon the
number of weeks that the employee will be or has been employed. An employer may make one
final payment as under paragraph (b)(2) of this section within one month after the end of
employment.

(4) The employer may utilize any 52-week period as the year, such as a calendar year, a
fiscal year, or an anniversary of hire year. If the employer does not identify some other
year period in advance, the calendar year will apply.

(c) A high level of compensation is a strong indicator of an employee's exempt status, thus
eliminating the need for a detailed analysis of the employee's job duties. Thus, a highly
compensated employee will qualify for exemption if the employee customarily and regularly
performs any one or more of the exempt duties or responsibilities of an executive,
administrative or professional employee identified in subparts B, C or D of this part. An
employee may qualify as a highly compensated executive employee, for example, if the
employee customarily and regularly directs the work of two or more other employees, even
though the employee does not meet all of the other requirements for the executive exemption
under § 541.100.

(d) This section applies only to employees whose primary duty includes performing office or
non-manual work. Thus, for example, non-management production-line workers and non-
management employees in maintenance, construction and similar occupations such as
carpenters, electricians, mechanics, plumbers, iron workers, craftsmen, operating engineers,
longshoremen, construction workers, laborers and other employees who perform work involving
repetitive operations with their hands, physical skill and energy are not exempt under this
section no matter how highly paid they might be.


----------------------------------------------------------------------


§ 541.602 Salary basis.
-----------------------

(a) General rule. An employee will be considered to be paid on a “salary basis” within the
meaning of this part if the employee regularly receives each pay period on a weekly, or less
frequent basis, a predetermined amount constituting all or part of the employee's
compensation, which amount is not subject to reduction because of variations in the quality
or quantity of the work performed.

(1) Subject to the exceptions provided in paragraph (b) of this section, an exempt employee
must receive the full salary for any week in which the employee performs any work without
regard to the number of days or hours worked. Exempt employees need not be paid for any
workweek in which they perform no work.

(2) An employee is not paid on a salary basis if deductions from the employee's
predetermined compensation are made for absences occasioned by the employer or by the
operating requirements of the business. If the employee is ready, willing and able to work,
deductions may not be made for time when work is not available.

(3) Up to ten percent of the salary amount required by § 541.600(a) may be satisfied by the
payment of nondiscretionary bonuses, incentives and commissions, that are paid annually or
more frequently. The employer may utilize any 52-week period as the year, such as a calendar
year, a fiscal year, or an anniversary of hire year. If the employer does not identify some
other year period in advance, the calendar year will apply. This provision does not apply to
highly compensated employees under § 541.601.

(i) If by the last pay period of the 52-week period the sum of the employee's weekly salary
plus nondiscretionary bonus, incentive, and commission payments received is less than 52
times the weekly salary amount required by § 541.600(a), the employer may make one final
payment sufficient to achieve the required level no later than the next pay period after the
end of the year. Any such final payment made after the end of the 52-week period may count
only toward the prior year's salary amount and not toward the salary amount in the year it
was paid.

(ii) An employee who does not work a full 52-week period for the employer, either because
the employee is newly hired after the beginning of this period or ends the employment before
the end of this period, may qualify for exemption if the employee receives a pro rata
portion of the minimum amount established in paragraph (a)(3) of this section, based upon
the number of weeks that the employee will be or has been employed. An employer may make one
final payment as under paragraph (a)(3)(i) of this section within one pay period after the
end of employment.

(b) Exceptions. The prohibition against deductions from pay in the salary basis requirement
is subject to the following exceptions:

(1) Deductions from pay may be made when an exempt employee is absent from work for one or
more full days for personal reasons, other than sickness or disability. Thus, if an employee
is absent for two full days to handle personal affairs, the employee's salaried status will
not be affected if deductions are made from the salary for two full-day absences. However,
if an exempt employee is absent for one and a half days for personal reasons, the employer
can deduct only for the one full-day absence.

(2) Deductions from pay may be made for absences of one or more full days occasioned by
sickness or disability (including work-related accidents) if the deduction is made in
accordance with a bona fide plan, policy or practice of providing compensation for loss of
salary occasioned by such sickness or disability. The employer is not required to pay any
portion of the employee's salary for full-day absences for which the employee receives
compensation under the plan, policy or practice. Deductions for such full-day absences also
may be made before the employee has qualified under the plan, policy or practice, and after
the employee has exhausted the leave allowance thereunder. Thus, for example, if an employer
maintains a short-term disability insurance plan providing salary replacement for 12 weeks
starting on the fourth day of absence, the employer may make deductions from pay for the
three days of absence before the employee qualifies for benefits under the plan; for the
twelve weeks in which the employee receives salary replacement benefits under the plan; and
for absences after the employee has exhausted the 12 weeks of salary replacement benefits.
Similarly, an employer may make deductions from pay for absences of one or more full days if
salary replacement benefits are provided under a State disability insurance law or under a
State workers' compensation law.

(3) While an employer cannot make deductions from pay for absences of an exempt employee
occasioned by jury duty, attendance as a witness or temporary military leave, the employer
can offset any amounts received by an employee as jury fees, witness fees or military pay
for a particular week against the salary due for that particular week without loss of the
exemption.

(4) Deductions from pay of exempt employees may be made for penalties imposed in good faith
for infractions of safety rules of major significance. Safety rules of major significance
include those relating to the prevention of serious danger in the workplace or to other
employees, such as rules prohibiting smoking in explosive plants, oil refineries and coal
mines.

(5) Deductions from pay of exempt employees may be made for unpaid disciplinary suspensions
of one or more full days imposed in good faith for infractions of workplace conduct rules.
Such suspensions must be imposed pursuant to a written policy applicable to all employees.
Thus, for example, an employer may suspend an exempt employee without pay for three days for
violating a generally applicable written policy prohibiting sexual harassment. Similarly, an
employer may suspend an exempt employee without pay for twelve days for violating a
generally applicable written policy prohibiting workplace violence.

(6) An employer is not required to pay the full salary in the initial or terminal week of
employment. Rather, an employer may pay a proportionate part of an employee's full salary
for the time actually worked in the first and last week of employment. In such weeks, the
payment of an hourly or daily equivalent of the employee's full salary for the time actually
worked will meet the requirement. However, employees are not paid on a salary basis within
the meaning of these regulations if they are employed occasionally for a few days, and the
employer pays them a proportionate part of the weekly salary when so employed.

(7) An employer is not required to pay the full salary for weeks in which an exempt employee
takes unpaid leave under the Family and Medical Leave Act. Rather, when an exempt employee
takes unpaid leave under the Family and Medical Leave Act, an employer may pay a
proportionate part of the full salary for time actually worked. For example, if an employee
who normally works 40 hours per week uses four hours of unpaid leave under the Family and
Medical Leave Act, the employer could deduct 10 percent of the employee's normal salary that
week.

(c) When calculating the amount of a deduction from pay allowed under paragraph (b) of this
section, the employer may use the hourly or daily equivalent of the employee's full weekly
salary or any other amount proportional to the time actually missed by the employee. A
deduction from pay as a penalty for violations of major safety rules under paragraph (b)(4)
of this section may be made in any amount.


----------------------------------------------------------------------


§ 541.604 Minimum guarantee plus extras.
----------------------------------------

(a) An employer may provide an exempt employee with additional compensation without losing
the exemption or violating the salary basis requirement, if the employment arrangement also
includes a guarantee of at least the minimum weekly-required amount paid on a salary basis.
Thus, for example, an exempt employee guaranteed at least $684 each week paid on a salary
basis may also receive additional compensation of a one percent commission on sales. An
exempt employee also may receive a percentage of the sales or profits of the employer if the
employment arrangement also includes a guarantee of at least $684 each week paid on a salary
basis. Similarly, the exemption is not lost if an exempt employee who is guaranteed at least
$684 each week paid on a salary basis also receives additional compensation based on hours
worked for work beyond the normal workweek. Such additional compensation may be paid on any
basis (e.g., flat sum, bonus payment, straight-time hourly amount, time and one-half or any
other basis), and may include paid time off.

(b) An exempt employee's earnings may be computed on an hourly, a daily or a shift basis,
without losing the exemption or violating the salary basis requirement, if the employment
arrangement also includes a guarantee of at least the minimum weekly required amount paid on
a salary basis regardless of the number of hours, days or shifts worked, and a reasonable
relationship exists between the guaranteed amount and the amount actually earned. The
reasonable relationship test will be met if the weekly guarantee is roughly equivalent to
the employee's usual earnings at the assigned hourly, daily or shift rate for the employee's
normal scheduled workweek. Thus, for example, an exempt employee guaranteed compensation of
at least $725 for any week in which the employee performs any work, and who normally works
four or five shifts each week, may be paid $210 per shift without violating the $684-per-
week salary basis requirement. The reasonable relationship requirement applies only if the
employee's pay is computed on an hourly, daily or shift basis. It does not apply, for
example, to an exempt store manager paid a guaranteed salary per week that exceeds the
current salary level who also receives a commission of one-half percent of all sales in the
store or five percent of the store's profits, which in some weeks may total as much as, or
even more than, the guaranteed salary.
