
29 CFR Part 778 - Overtime Compensation and the Regular Rate
============================================================


§ 778.107 General standard for overtime pay.
--------------------------------------------

The general overtime pay standard in section 7(a) requires that overtime must be compensated
at a rate not less than one and one-half times the regular rate at which the employee is
actually employed. The regular rate of pay at which the employee is employed may in no event
be less than the statutory minimum. (The statutory minimum is the specified minimum wage
applicable under section 6 of the Act, except in the case of workers specially provided for
in section 14 and workers in Puerto Rico, the Virgin Islands, and American Samoa who are
covered by wage orders issued pursuant to section 8 of the Act.) If the employee's regular
rate of pay is higher than the statutory minimum, his overtime compensation must be computed
at a rate not less than one and one-half times such higher rate. Under certain conditions
prescribed in section 7 (f), (g), and (j), the Act provides limited exceptions to the
application of the general standard of section 7(a) for computing overtime pay based on the
regular rate. With respect to these, see §§ 778.400 through 778.421 and 778.601 and part 548
of this chapter. The Act also provides, in section 7(b), (i), (k) and (m) and in section 13,
certain partial and total exemptions from the application of section 7(a) to certain
employees and under certain conditions. Regulations and interpretations concerning these
exemptions are outside the scope of this part 778 and reference should be made to other
applicable parts of this chapter.


----------------------------------------------------------------------


§ 778.108 The “regular rate”.
-----------------------------

The “regular rate” of pay under the Act cannot be left to a declaration by the parties as to
what is to be treated as the regular rate for an employee; it must be drawn from what
happens under the employment contract (Bay Ridge Operating Co. v. Aaron, 334 U.S. 446). The
Supreme Court has described it as the hourly rate actually paid the employee for the normal,
nonovertime workweek for which he is employed—an “actual fact” (Walling v. Youngerman-
Reynolds Hardwood Co., 325 U.S. 419). Section 7(e) of the Act requires inclusion in the
“regular rate” of “all remuneration for employment paid to, or on behalf of, the employee”
except payments specifically excluded by paragraphs (1) through (7) of that subsection.
(These seven types of payments, which are set forth in § 778.200 and discussed in §§ 778.201
through 778.224, are hereafter referred to as “statutory exclusions.”) As stated by the
Supreme Court in the Youngerman-Reynolds case cited above: “Once the parties have decided
upon the amount of wages and the mode of payment the determination of the regular rate
becomes a matter of mathematical computation, the result of which is unaffected by any
designation of a contrary ‘regular rate’ in the wage contracts.”


----------------------------------------------------------------------


§ 778.114 Fluctuating Workweek Method of Computing Overtime.
------------------------------------------------------------

(a) An employer may use the fluctuating workweek method to properly compute overtime
compensation based on the regular rate for a nonexempt employee under the following
circumstances:

(1) The employee works hours that fluctuate from week to week;

(2) The employee receives a fixed salary that does not vary with the number of hours worked
in the workweek, whether few or many;

(3) The amount of the employee's fixed salary is sufficient to provide compensation to the
employee at a rate not less than the applicable minimum wage rate for every hour worked in
those workweeks in which the number of hours the employee works is greatest;

(4) The employee and the employer have a clear and mutual understanding that the fixed
salary is compensation (apart from overtime premiums and any bonuses, premium payments,
commissions, hazard pay, or other additional pay of any kind not excludable from the regular
rate under section 7(e)(l) through (8) of the Act) for the total hours worked each workweek
regardless of the number of hours, although the clear and mutual understanding does not need
to extend to the specific method used to calculate overtime pay; and

(5) The employee receives overtime compensation, in addition to such fixed salary and any
bonuses, premium payments, commissions, hazard pay, and additional pay of any kind, for all
overtime hours worked at a rate of not less than one-half the employee's regular rate of pay
for that workweek. Since the salary is fixed, the regular rate of the employee will vary
from week to week and is determined by dividing the amount of the salary and any non-
excludable additional pay received each workweek by the number of hours worked in the
workweek. Payment for overtime hours at not less than one-half such rate satisfies the
overtime pay requirement because such hours have already been compensated at the straight
time rate by payment of the fixed salary and non-excludable additional pay. Payment of any
bonuses, premium payments, commissions, hazard pay, and additional pay of any kind is
compatible with the fluctuating workweek method of overtime payment, and such payments must
be included in the calculation of the regular rate unless excludable under section 7(e)(1)
through (8) of the Act.

(b) The application of the principles stated above may be illustrated by the case of an
employee whose hours of work do not customarily follow a regular schedule but vary from week
to week, whose work hours never exceed 50 hours in a workweek, and whose salary of $600 a
week is paid with the understanding that it constitutes the employee's compensation (apart
from overtime premiums and any bonuses, premium payments, commissions, hazard pay, or other
additional pay of any kind not excludable from the regular rate under section 7(e)(1)
through (8)) for all hours worked in the workweek.

(1) Example. If during the course of 4 weeks this employee receives no additional
compensation and works 37.5, 44, 50, and 48 hours, the regular rate of pay in each of these
weeks is $16, $13.64, $12, and $12.50, respectively. Since the employee has already received
straight time compensation for all hours worked in these weeks, only additional half-time
pay is due for overtime hours. For the first week the employee is owed $600 (fixed salary of
$600, with no overtime hours); for the second week $627.28 (fixed salary of $600, and 4
hours of overtime pay at one-half times the regular rate of $13.64 for a total overtime
payment of $27.28); for the third week $660 (fixed salary of $600, and 10 hours of overtime
pay at one-half times the regular rate of $12 for a total overtime payment of $60); for the
fourth week $650 (fixed salary of $600, and 8 overtime hours at one-half times the regular
rate of $12.50 for a total overtime payment of $50).

(2) Example. If during the course of 2 weeks this employee works 37.5 and 48 hours and 4 of
the hours the employee worked each week were nightshift hours compensated at a premium rate
of an extra $5 per hour, the employee's total straight time earnings would be $620 (fixed
salary of $600 plus $20 of premium pay for the 4 nightshift hours). In this case, the
regular rate of pay in each of these weeks is $16.53 and $12.92, respectively, and the
employee's total compensation would be calculated as follows: For the 37.5 hour week the
employee is owed $620 (fixed salary of $600 plus $20 of non-overtime premium pay, with no
overtime hours); and for the 48 hour week $671.68 (fixed salary of $600 plus $20 of non-
overtime premium pay, and 8 hours of overtime at one-half times the regular rate of $12.92
for a total overtime payment of $51.68). This principle applies in the same manner
regardless of the reason for the hourly premium rate (e.g., weekend hours).

(3) Example. If during the course of 2 weeks this employee works 37.5 and 48 hours and the
employee received a $100 productivity bonus each week, the employee's total straight time
earnings would be $700 (fixed salary of $600 plus $100 productivity bonus). In this case,
the regular rate of pay in each of these weeks is $18.67 and $14.58, respectively, and the
employee's total compensation would be calculated as follows: For the 37.5 hour week the
employee is owed $700 (fixed salary of $600 plus $100 productivity bonus, with no overtime
hours); and for the 48 hour week $758.32 (fixed salary of $600 plus $100 productivity bonus,
and 8 hours of overtime at one-half times the regular rate of $14.58 for a total overtime
payment of $58.32).

(c) Typically, such fixed salaries are paid to employees who do not customarily work a
regular schedule of hours and are in amounts agreed on by the parties as adequate
compensation for long workweeks as well as short ones, under the circumstances of the
employment as a whole. Where the conditions for the use of the fluctuating workweek method
of overtime payment are present, the Act, in requiring that “not less than” the prescribed
premium of 50 percent for overtime hours worked be paid, does not prohibit paying more. On
the other hand, where all the facts indicate that an employee is being paid for overtime
hours at a rate no greater than that which the employee receives for nonovertime hours,
compliance with the Act cannot be rested on any application of the fluctuating workweek
overtime formula.

(d) The fixed salary described in paragraph (a) of this section does not vary with the
number of hours worked in the workweek, whether few or many. However, employers using the
fluctuating workweek method of overtime payment may take occasional disciplinary deductions
from the employee's salary for willful absences or tardiness or for infractions of major
work rules, provided that the deductions do not cut into the minimum wage or overtime pay
required by the Act.


----------------------------------------------------------------------


§ 778.200 Provisions governing inclusion, exclusion, and crediting of particular payments.
------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------

(a) Section 7(e). This subsection of the Act provides as follows:

As used in this section the “regular rate” at which an employee is employed shall be deemed
to include all remuneration for employment paid to, or on behalf of, the employee, but shall
not be deemed to include: (1) Sums paid as gifts; payments in the nature of gifts made at
Christmas time or on other special occasions, as a reward for service, the amounts of which
are not measured by or dependent on hours worked, production, or efficiency; [discussed in §
778.212]. (2) Payments made for occasional periods when no work is performed due to
vacation, holiday, illness, failure of the employer to provide sufficient work, or other
similar cause; reasonable payments for traveling expenses, or other expenses, incurred by an
employee in the furtherance of his employer's interests and properly reimbursable by the
employer; and other similar payments to an employee which are not made as compensation for
his hours of employment; [discussed in §§ 778.216 through 778.224]. (3) Sums paid in
recognition of services performed during a given period if either, (a) both the fact that
payment is to be made and the amount of the payment are determined at the sole discretion of
the employer at or near the end of the period and not pursuant to any prior contract,
agreement, or promise causing the employee to expect such payments regularly; or (b) the
payments are made pursuant to a bona fide profit-sharing plan or trust or bona fide thrift
or savings plan, meeting the requirements of the Secretary of Labor set forth in appropriate
regulations which he shall issue, having due regard among other relevant factors, to the
extent to which the amounts paid to the employee are determined without regard to hours of
work, production, or efficiency; or (c) the payments are talent fees (as such talent fees
are defined and delimited by regulations of the Secretary) paid to performers, including
announcers, on radio and television programs; [discussed in §§ 778.208 through 778.215 and
778.225]. (4) Contributions irrevocably made by an employer to a trustee or third person
pursuant to a bona fide plan for providing old-age, retirement, life, accident, or health
insurance or similar benefits for employees; [discussed in §§ 778.214 and 778.215]. (5)
Extra compensation provided by a premium rate paid for certain hours worked by the employee
in any day or workweek because such hours are hours worked in excess of eight in a day or in
excess of the maximum workweek applicable to such employee under subsection (a) or in excess
of the employee's normal working hours or regular working hours, as the case may be;
[discussed in §§ 778.201 and 778.202]. (6) Extra compensation provided by a premium rate
paid for work by the employee on Saturdays, Sundays, holidays, or regular days of rest, or
on the sixth or seventh day of the workweek, where such premium rate is not less than one
and one-half times the rate established in good faith for like work performed in nonovertime
hours on other days; or [discussed in §§ 778.203, 778.205, and 778.206]. (7) Extra
compensation provided by a premium rate paid to the employee, in pursuance of an applicable
employment contract or collective bargaining agreement, for work outside of the hours
established in good faith by the contract or agreement as the basic, normal, or regular
workday (not exceeding eight hours) or workweek (not exceeding the maximum workweek
applicable to such employee under subsection (a)), where such premium rate is not less than
one and one-half times the rate established in good faith by the contract or agreement for
like work performed during such workday or workweek; [discussed in §§ 778.201 and 778.206].
(8) Any value or income derived from employer-provided grants or rights provided pursuant to
a stock option, stock appreciation right, or bona fide employee stock purchase program which
is not otherwise excludable under any of paragraphs (a)(1) through (a)(7) of this section
if— (i) Grants are made pursuant to a program, the terms and conditions of which are
communicated to participating employees either at the beginning of the employee's
participation in the program or at the time of the grant; (ii) In the case of stock options
and stock appreciation rights, the grant or right cannot be exercisable for a period of at
least 6 months after the time of grant (except that grants or rights may become exercisable
because of an employee's death, disability, retirement, or a change in corporate ownership,
or other circumstances permitted by regulation), and the exercise price is at least 85
percent of the fair market value of the stock at the time of grant; (iii) Exercise of any
grant or right is voluntary; and (iv) Any determinations regarding the award of, and the
amount of, employer-provided grants or rights that are based on performance are— (A) Made
based upon meeting previously established performance criteria (which may include hours of
work, efficiency, or productivity) of any business unit consisting of at least 10 employees
or of a facility, except that, any determinations may be based on length of service or
minimum schedule of hours or days of work; or (B) Made based upon the past performance
(which may include any criteria) of one or more employees in a given period so long as the
determination is in the sole discretion of the employer and not pursuant to any prior
contract.

(b) Section 7(h). This subsection of the Act provides as follows:

(1) Except as provided in paragraph (2), sums excluded from the regular rate pursuant to
subsection (e) shall not be creditable toward wages required under section 6 or overtime
compensation required under this section. (2) Extra compensation paid as described in
paragraphs (5), (6), and (7) of subsection (e) of this section shall be creditable toward
overtime compensation payable pursuant to this section.

(c) Only the statutory exclusions are authorized. It is important to determine the scope of
these exclusions, since all remuneration for employment paid to employees which does not
fall within one of these seven exclusionary clauses must be added into the total
compensation received by the employee before his regular hourly rate of pay is determined.


----------------------------------------------------------------------


§ 778.208 Inclusion and exclusion of bonuses in computing the “regular rate.”
-----------------------------------------------------------------------------

Section 7(e) of the Act requires the inclusion in the regular rate of all remuneration for
employment except eight specified types of payments. Among these excludable payments are
discretionary bonuses, gifts and payments in the nature of gifts on special occasions,
contributions by the employer to certain welfare plans and payments made by the employer
pursuant to certain profit-sharing, thrift and savings plans. These are discussed in §§
778.211 through 778.214. Bonuses which do not qualify for exclusion from the regular rate as
one of these types must be totaled in with other earnings to determine the regular rate on
which overtime pay must be based. Bonus payments are payments made in addition to the
regular earnings of an employee. For a discussion on the bonus form as an evasive
bookkeeping device, see §§ 778.502 and 778.503.


----------------------------------------------------------------------


§ 778.209 Method of inclusion of bonus in regular rate.
-------------------------------------------------------

(a) General rules. Where a bonus payment is considered a part of the regular rate at which
an employee is employed, it must be included in computing his regular hourly rate of pay and
overtime compensation. No difficulty arises in computing overtime compensation if the bonus
covers only one weekly pay period. The amount of the bonus is merely added to the other
earnings of the employee (except statutory exclusions) and the total divided by total hours
worked. Under many bonus plans, however, calculations of the bonus may necessarily be
deferred over a period of time longer than a workweek. In such a case the employer may
disregard the bonus in computing the regular hourly rate until such time as the amount of
the bonus can be ascertained. Until that is done he may pay compensation for overtime at one
and one-half times the hourly rate paid by the employee, exclusive of the bonus. When the
amount of the bonus can be ascertained, it must be apportioned back over the workweeks of
the period during which it may be said to have been earned. The employee must then receive
an additional amount of compensation for each workweek that he worked overtime during the
period equal to one-half of the hourly rate of pay allocable to the bonus for that week
multiplied by the number of statutory overtime hours worked during the week.

(b) Allocation of bonus where bonus earnings cannot be identified with particular workweeks.
If it is impossible to allocate the bonus among the workweeks of the period in proportion to
the amount of the bonus actually earned each week, some other reasonable and equitable
method of allocation must be adopted. For example, it may be reasonable and equitable to
assume that the employee earned an equal amount of bonus each week of the period to which
the bonus relates, and if the facts support this assumption additional compensation for each
overtime week of the period may be computed and paid in an amount equal to one-half of the
average hourly increase in pay resulting from bonus allocated to the week, multiplied by the
number of statutory overtime hours worked in that week. Or, if there are facts which make it
inappropriate to assume equal bonus earnings for each workweek, it may be reasonable and
equitable to assume that the employee earned an equal amount of bonus each hour of the pay
period and the resultant hourly increase may be determined by dividing the total bonus by
the number of hours worked by the employee during the period for which it is paid. The
additional compensation due for the overtime workweeks in the period may then be computed by
multiplying the total number of statutory overtime hours worked in each such workweek during
the period by one-half this hourly increase.


----------------------------------------------------------------------


§ 778.211 Discretionary bonuses.
--------------------------------

(a) Statutory provision. Section 7(e) (3)(a) of the Act provides that the regular rate shall
not be deemed to include “sums paid in recognition of services performed during a given
period if * * * (a) both the fact that payment is to be made and the amount of the payment
are determined at the sole discretion of the employer at or near the end of the period and
not pursuant to any prior contract, agreement, or promise causing the employee to expect
such payments regularly * * *”. Such sums may not, however, be credited toward overtime
compensation due under the Act.

(b) Discretionary character of excluded bonus. In order for a bonus to qualify for exclusion
as a discretionary bonus under section 7(e)(3)(a) the employer must retain discretion both
as to the fact of payment and as to the amount until a time quite close to the end of the
period for which the bonus is paid. The sum, if any, to be paid as a bonus is determined by
the employer without prior promise or agreement. The employee has no contract right, express
or implied, to any amount. If the employer promises in advance to pay a bonus, he has
abandoned his discretion with regard to it. Thus, if an employer announces to his employees
in January that he intends to pay them a bonus in June, he has thereby abandoned his
discretion regarding the fact of payment by promising a bonus to his employees. Such a bonus
would not be excluded from the regular rate under section 7(e)(3)(a). Similarly, an employer
who promises to sales employees that they will receive a monthly bonus computed on the basis
of allocating 1 cent for each item sold whenever, is his discretion, the financial condition
of the firm warrants such payments, has abandoned discretion with regard to the amount of
the bonus though not with regard to the fact of payment. Such a bonus would not be excluded
from the regular rate. On the other hand, if a bonus such as the one just described were
paid without prior contract, promise or announcement and the decision as to the fact and
amount of payment lay in the employer's sole discretion, the bonus would be properly
excluded from the regular rate.

(c) Promised bonuses not excluded. The bonus, to be excluded under section 7(e)(3)(a), must
not be paid pursuant to any prior contract, agreement, or promise. For example, any bonus
which is promised to employees upon hiring or which is the result of collective bargaining
would not be excluded from the regular rate under this provision of the Act. Bonuses which
are announced to employees to induce them to work more steadily or more rapidly or more
efficiently or to remain with the firm are regarded as part of the regular rate of pay. Most
attendance bonuses, individual or group production bonuses, bonuses for quality and accuracy
of work, bonuses contingent upon the employee's continuing in employment until the time the
payment is to be made and the like are in this category; in such circumstances they must be
included in the regular rate of pay.

(d) Labels are not determinative. The label assigned to a bonus does not conclusively
determine whether a bonus is discretionary under section 7(e)(3). Instead, the terms of the
statute and the facts specific to the bonus at issue determine whether bonuses are
excludable discretionary bonuses. Thus, regardless of the label or name assigned to bonuses,
bonuses are discretionary and excludable if both the fact that the bonuses are to be paid
and the amounts are determined at the sole discretion of the employer at or near the end of
the periods to which the bonuses correspond and they are not paid pursuant to any prior
contract, agreement, or promise causing the employee to expect such payments regularly.
Examples of bonuses that may be discretionary include bonuses to employees who made unique
or extraordinary efforts which are not awarded according to pre-established criteria,
severance bonuses, referral bonuses for employees not primarily engaged in recruiting
activities, bonuses for overcoming challenging or stressful situations, employee-of-the-
month bonuses, and other similar compensation. Such bonuses are usually not promised in
advance and the fact and amount of payment is in the sole discretion of the employer until
at or near the end of the period to which the bonus corresponds.


----------------------------------------------------------------------


§ 778.212 Gifts, Christmas and special occasion bonuses.
--------------------------------------------------------

(a) Statutory provision. Section 7(e)(1) of the Act provides that the term “regular rate”
shall not be deemed to include “sums paid as gifts; payments in the nature of gifts made at
Christmas time or on other special occasions, as a reward for service, the amounts of which
are not measured by or dependent on hours worked, production, or efficiency * * *”. Such
sums may not, however, be credited toward overtime compensation due under the Act.

(b) Gift or similar payment. To qualify for exclusion under section 7(e)(1) the bonus must
be actually a gift or in the nature of a gift. If it is measured by hours worked,
production, or efficiency, the payment is geared to wages and hours during the bonus period
and is no longer to be considered as in the nature of a gift. If the payment is so
substantial that it can be assumed that employees consider it a part of the wages for which
they work, the bonus cannot be considered to be in the nature of a gift. Obviously, if the
bonus is paid pursuant to contract (so that the employee has a legal right to the payment
and could bring suit to enforce it), it is not in the nature of a gift.

(c) Application of exclusion. If the bonus paid at Christmas or on other special occasion is
a gift or in the nature of a gift, it may be excluded from the regular rate under section
7(e)(1) even though it is paid with regularity so that the employees are led to expect it
and even though the amounts paid to different employees or groups of employees vary with the
amount of the salary or regular hourly rate of such employees or according to their length
of service with the firm so long as the amounts are not measured by or directly dependent
upon hours worked, production, or efficiency. A Christmas bonus paid (not pursuant to
contract) in the amount of two weeks' salary to all employees and an equal additional amount
for each 5 years of service with the firm, for example, would be excludable from the regular
rate under this category. Employers may also provide gifts with more regularity throughout
the year, as long as they are provided with the understanding that they are gifts. Office
coffee and snacks provided to employees, for example, would also be excludable from the
regular rate under this category.


----------------------------------------------------------------------


§ 778.215 Conditions for exclusion of benefit-plan contributions under section 7(e)(4).
---------------------------------------------------------------------------------------

(a) General rules. In order for an employer's contribution to qualify for exclusion from the
regular rate under section 7(e)(4) of the Act the following conditions must be met:

(1) The contributions must be made pursuant to a specific plan or program adopted by the
employer, or by contract as a result of collective bargaining, and communicated to the
employees. This may be either a company-financed plan or an employer-employee contributory
plan.

(2) The primary purpose of the plan must be to provide systematically for the payment of
benefits to employees on account of death, disability, advanced age, retirement, illness,
medical expenses, hospitalization, accident, unemployment, legal services, or other events
that could cause significant future financial hardship or expense.

(3) In a plan or trust, either:

(i) The benefits must be specified or definitely determinable on an actuarial basis; or

(ii) There must be both a definite formula for determining the amount to be contributed by
the employer and a definite formula for determining the benefits for each of the employees
participating in the plan; or

(iii) There must be both a formula for determining the amount to be contributed by the
employer and a provision for determining the individual benefits by a method which is
consistent with the purposes of the plan or trust under section 7(e)(4) of the Act.

(iv) Note: The requirements in paragraphs (a)(3) (ii) and (iii) of this section for a
formula for determining the amount to be contributed by the employer may be met by a formula
which requires a specific and substantial minimum contribution and which provides that the
employer may add somewhat to that amount within specified limits; provided, however, that
there is a reasonable relationship between the specified minimum and maximum contributions.
Thus, formulas providing for a minimum contribution of 10 percent of profits and giving the
employer discretion to add to that amount up to 20 percent of profits, or for a minimum
contribution of 5 percent of compensation and discretion to increase up to a maximum of 15
percent of compensation, would meet the requirement. However, a plan which provides for
insignificant minimum contributions and permits a variation so great that, for all practical
purposes, the formula becomes meaningless as a measure of contributions, would not meet the
requirements.

(4) The employer's contributions must be paid irrevocably to a trustee or third person
pursuant to an insurance agreement, trust or other funded arrangement. The trustee must
assume the usual fiduciary responsibilities imposed upon trustees by applicable law. The
trust or fund must be set up in such a way that in no event will the employer be able to
recapture any of the contributions paid in nor in any way divert the funds to his own use or
benefit. (It should also be noted that in the case of joint employer-employee contributory
plans, where the employee contributions are not paid over to a third person or to a trustee
unaffiliated with the employer, violations of the Act may result if the employee
contributions cut into the required minimum or overtime rates. See part 531 of this
chapter.) Although an employer's contributions made to a trustee or third person pursuant to
a benefit plan must be irrevocably made, this does not prevent return to the employer of
sums which he had paid in excess of the contributions actually called for by the plan, as
where such excess payments result from error or from the necessity of marking payments to
cover the estimated cost of contributions at a time when the exact amount of the necessary
contributions under the plan is not yet ascertained. For example, a benefit plan may provide
for definite insurance benefits for employees in the event of the happening of a specified
contingency such as death, sickness, accident, etc., and may provide that the cost of such
definite benefits, either in full or any balance in excess of specified employee
contributions, will be borne by the employer. In such a case the return by the insurance
company to the employer of sums paid by him in excess of the amount required to provide the
benefits which, under the plan, are to be provided through contributions by the employer,
will not be deemed a recapture or diversion by the employer of contributions made pursuant
to the plan.

(5) The plan must not give an employee the right to assign his benefits under the plan nor
the option to receive any part of the employer's contributions in cash instead of the
benefits under the plan: Provided, however, That if a plan otherwise qualified as a bona
fide benefit plan under section 7(e)(4) of the Act, it will still be regarded as a bona fide
plan even though it provides, as an incidental part thereof, for the payment to an employee
in cash of all or a part of the amount standing to his credit (i) at the time of the
severance of the employment relation due to causes other than retirement, disability, or
death, or (ii) upon proper termination of the plan, or (iii) during the course of his
employment under circumstances specified in the plan and not inconsistent with the general
purposes of the plan to provide the benefits described in section 7(e)(4) of the Act.

(b) Plans under sections of the Internal Revenue Code. In the absence of evidence to the
contrary, where the benefit plan or trust has been approved by the Internal Revenue Service
as satisfying the requirements of section 401(a), 403(a), or 403(b) of the Internal Revenue
Code, is otherwise maintained pursuant to a written document that the plan sponsor
reasonably believes satisfies the requirements of section 401(a), 403(a), 403(b), 408(k) or
408(p) of the Internal Revenue Code, or is sponsored by a government employer that
reasonably believes the plan satisfies the requirements of section 457(b) of the Internal
Revenue Code, the plan or trust will be considered to meet the conditions specified in
paragraphs (a)(1), (2), (4), and (5) of this section.


----------------------------------------------------------------------


§ 778.221 “Call-back” pay.
--------------------------

(a) General. Typically, “call-back” or “call-out” payments are made pursuant to agreement or
established practice and consist of a specified number of hours' pay at the applicable
straight time or overtime rates received by an employee on occasions when, after his
scheduled hours of work have ended and without prearrangement, he responds to a call from
his employer to perform extra work. The amount by which the specified number of hours' pay
exceeds the compensation for hours actually worked is considered as a payment that is not
made for hours worked. As such, it may be excluded from the computation of the employee's
regular rate and cannot be credited toward statutory overtime compensation due the employee.
Payments that are prearranged, however, may not be excluded from the regular rate. For
example, if an employer retailer called in an employee to help clean up the store for 3
hours after an unexpected roof leak, and then again 3 weeks later for 2 hours to cover for a
coworker who left work for a family emergency, payments for those instances would be without
prearrangement and any call-back pay that exceeded the amount the employee would receive for
the hours worked would be excludable. However, when payments under §§ 778.221 and 778.222
are prearranged, they are compensation for work. The key inquiry for determining
prearrangement is whether the extra work was anticipated and therefore reasonably could have
been scheduled. For example, if an employer restaurant anticipates needing extra servers for
two hours during the busiest part of each Saturday evening and calls in employees to meet
that need instead of scheduling additional servers, that would be prearrangement and any
call-back pay would be included in the regular rate.

(b) Application illustrated. The application of the principles in paragraph (a) of this
section to call-back payments may be illustrated as follows: An employment agreement
provides a minimum of 3 hours' pay at time and one-half for any employee called back to work
outside his scheduled hours. The employees covered by the agreement, who are entitled to
overtime pay after 40 hours a week, normally work 8 hours each day, Monday through Friday,
inclusive, in a workweek beginning on Monday, and are paid overtime compensation at time and
one-half for all hours worked in excess of 8 in any day or 40 in any workweek. Assume that
an employee covered by this agreement and paid at the rate of $12 an hour works 1 hour
overtime or a total of 9 hours on Monday, and works 8 hours each on Tuesday through Friday,
inclusive. After he has gone home on Friday evening, he is called back to perform an
emergency job. His hours worked on the call total 2 hours and he receives 3 hours' pay at
time and one-half, or $54, under the call-back provision, in addition to $480 for working
his regular schedule and $18 for overtime worked on Monday evening. In computing overtime
compensation due this employee under the Act, the 43 actual hours (not 44) are counted as
working time during the week. In addition to $516 pay at the $12 rate for all these hours,
he has received under the agreement a premium of $6 for the 1 overtime hour on Monday and of
$12 for the 2 hours of overtime work on the call, plus an extra sum of $18 paid by reason of
the provision for minimum call-back pay. For purposes of the Act, the extra premiums paid
for actual hours of overtime work on Monday and on the Friday call (a total of $18) may be
excluded as true overtime premiums in computing his regular rate for the week and may be
credited toward compensation due under the Act, but the extra $18 received under the call-
back provision is not regarded as paid for hours worked; thus, it may be excluded from the
regular rate, but it cannot be credited toward overtime compensation due under the Act. The
regular rate of the employee, therefore, remains $12, and he has received an overtime
premium of $6 an hour for 3 overtime hours of work. This satisfies the requirements of
section 7 of the Act. The same would be true, of course, if in the foregoing example, the
employee was called back outside his scheduled hours for the 2-hour emergency job on another
night of the week or on Saturday or Sunday, instead of on Friday night.


----------------------------------------------------------------------


§ 778.223 Pay for non-productive hours distinguished.
-----------------------------------------------------

(a) Under the Act an employee must be compensated for all hours worked. As a general rule
the term “hours worked” will include:

(1) All time during which an employee is required to be on duty or to be on the employer's
premises or at a prescribed workplace; and

(2) All time during which an employee is suffered or permitted to work whether or not he is
required to do so.

(b) Thus, working time is not limited to the hours spent in active productive labor, but
includes time given by the employee to the employer even though part of the time may be
spent in idleness. Some of the hours spent by employees, under certain circumstances, in
such activities as waiting for work, remaining “on call”, traveling on the employer's
business or to and from workplaces, and in meal periods and rest periods are regarded as
working time and some are not. The governing principles are discussed in part 785 of this
chapter (interpretative bulletin on “hours worked”) and part 790 of this chapter (statement
of effect of Portal-to-Portal Act of 1947). To the extent that these hours are regarded as
working time, payment made as compensation for these hours obviously cannot be characterized
as “payments not for hours worked.” Such compensation is treated in the same manner as
compensation for any other working time and is, of course, included in the regular rate of
pay. Where payment is ostensibly made as compensation for such of these hours as are not
regarded as working time under the Act, the payment is nevertheless included in the regular
rate of pay unless it qualifies for exclusion from the regular rate as one of a type of
“payments made for occasional periods when no work is performed due to failure of the
employer to provide sufficient work, or other similar cause” as discussed in § 778.218 or is
excludable on some other basis under section 7(e)(2). For example, an employment contract
may provide that employees who are assigned to take calls for specific periods will receive
a payment of $5 for each 8-hour period during which they are “on call” in addition to pay at
their regular (or overtime) rate for hours actually spent in making calls. If the employees
who are thus on call are not confined to their homes or to any particular place, but may
come and go as they please, provided that they leave word where they may be reached, the
hours spent “on call” are not considered as hours worked. Although the payment received by
such employees for such “on call” time is, therefore, not allocable to any specific hours of
work, it is clearly paid as compensation for performing a duty involved in the employee's
job and is not of a type excludable under section 7(e)(2). The payment must therefore be
included in the employee's regular rate in the same manner as any payment for services, such
as an attendance bonus, which is not related to any specific hours of work. The principle in
this paragraph (b) also applies when such “on call” pay is mandated by state or local law.


----------------------------------------------------------------------


§ 778.224 “Other similar payments”.
-----------------------------------

(a) General. Sections 778.216 through 778.223 have enumerated and discussed the basic types
of payments for which exclusion from the regular rate is specifically provided under section
7(e)(2) because they are not made as compensation for hours of work. Section 7(e)(2) also
authorizes exclusion from the regular rate of other similar payments to an employee which
are not made as compensation for his hours of employment. Such payments do not depend on
hours worked, services rendered, job performance, or other criteria that depend on the
quality or quantity of the employee's work. Conditions not dependent on the quality or
quality of work include a reasonable waiting period for eligibility, the requirement to
repay benefits as a remedy for employee misconduct, and limiting eligibility on the basis of
geographic location or job position. Since a variety of miscellaneous payments are paid by
an employer to an employee under peculiar circumstances, it was not considered feasible to
attempt to list them. They must, however, be “similar” in character to the payments
specifically described in section 7(e)(2). It is clear that the clause was not intended to
permit the exclusion from the regular rate of payments such as most bonuses or the
furnishing of facilities like board and lodging which, though not directly attributable to
any particular hours of work are, nevertheless, clearly understood to be compensation for
services.

(b) Examples of other excludable payments. A few examples may serve to illustrate some of
the types of payments intended to be excluded as “other similar payments”.

(1) Sums paid to an employee for the rental of his truck or car.

(2) Loans or advances made by the employer to the employee.

(3) The cost to the employer of conveniences furnished to the employee such as:

(i) Parking spaces and parking benefits;

(ii) Restrooms and lockers;

(iii) On-the-job medical care;

(iv) Treatment provided on-site from specialists such as chiropractors, massage therapists,
physical therapists, personal trainers, counselors, or Employee Assistance Programs; or

(v) Gym access, gym memberships, fitness classes, and recreational facilities.

(4) The cost to the employer of providing wellness programs, such as health risk
assessments, biometric screenings, vaccination clinics (including annual flu vaccinations),
nutrition classes, weight loss programs, smoking cessation programs, stress reduction
programs, exercise programs, coaching to help employees meet health goals, financial
wellness programs or financial counseling, and mental health wellness programs.

(5) Discounts on employer-provided retail goods and services, and tuition benefits (whether
paid to an employee, an education provider, or a student loan program).

(6) Adoption assistance (including financial assistance, legal services, or information and
referral services).
