
--- page 1 ---
U.S. Department of Labor    Wage and Hour Division 
Washington, D.C. 20210 
 
 
 
FLSA2026-2 
January 5, 2026 
Dear Name*: 
This letter responds to your request for an opinion concerning whether section 7(e) of the Fair 
Labor Standards Act (FLSA or Act) permits your employer to exclude certain bonus payments 
from the “regular rate of pay” and, if not, how it must include these payments in the calculation of 
employee overtime premiums. 
It is our opinion that, under the facts and circumstances set forth in your request, your employer 
must include the bonus payments you describe in each employee’s regular rate of pay for every 
workweek said bonuses are earned.  These payments do not qualify as discretionary bonuses 
excluded by the Act from the regular rate, or fall within any other statutory exclusion.  Accordingly, 
your employer must include these incentive bonus payments, in addition to each employee’s base 
hourly wage, in the regular rate used to calculate overtime, as described below. 
BACKGROUND 
You represent that your employer operates in the waste management industry and pays its 
employee drivers a rate of $12.00 per hour.  Based on the practices described, we presume that 
your employer classifies its drivers as non-exempt and subject to the requirements of sections 6 
and 7 of the Act, and, as a result, pays them at least the minimum wage for all hours worked and 
overtime premiums for all hours worked over 40 in a workweek.1  In addition to this base hourly 
wage and overtime premium, drivers can earn additional compensation pursuant to a “Safety, Job 
Duties, and Performance” bonus plan.  Under this plan, an employee can earn supplemental 
performance-based bonuses each pay period that, if earned, apply to all hours worked in that pay 
period. 
Your employer’s bonus plan uses detailed criteria and one or more formulas both to determine 
whether a bonus is earned and to calculate the hourly bonus amount each employee earns.  The 
plan rewards an employee’s punctuality, attendance, consistency in completing daily safety tasks, 
 
1 You did not request—and so this letter does not provide—an opinion on whether these drivers qualify for 
the overtime exemption in 29 U.S.C. § 213(b)(1) (exempting employees from overtime pay requirements 
based on certain motor carrier activities conducted in interstate commerce). 
--- page 2 ---
2 
 
driving safety, compliance with traffic laws, proper attire, and performance efficiency.2  The 
maximum bonus amount is $9.50 per hour.  We assume the employees receive the bonus plan 
information before performing the work. 
Upon applying the bonus plan’s criteria, your employer pays the bonus described above, along 
with the base hourly wages for each pay period.  Your employer does not, however, include the 
bonus payments in each employee’s regular rate for purposes of calculating overtime premiums. 
Instead, your employer calculates all overtime premiums owed using only each employee’s $12.00 
base hourly rate. 
GENERAL LEGAL PRINCIPLES 
The FLSA requires that employers pay at least the federal minimum wage for all hours worked 
and overtime pay “at a rate not less than one and one-half times the regular rate at which [the 
employee] is employed” to all non-exempt employees for all hours worked over 40 hours in a 
workweek.  29 U.S.C. §§ 206, 207(a)(1).  The “regular rate” includes “all remuneration for 
employment paid to, or on behalf of, the employee,” with limited exceptions.  See id. § 207(e). 
“[T]he rule for determining the regular rate of pay is to divide the wages actually paid by the hours 
actually worked in any workweek[.]” Bay Ridge Operating Co. v. Aaron, 334 U.S. 446, 459–60 
(1948); see also 29 C.F.R. § 778.109.  First, the employer must total the employee’s “straight-
time” earnings actually paid for that workweek, all remuneration less any amounts excluded under 
section 7(e).  Then, the employer must total all the hours actually worked in that same workweek. 
Once the straight-time earnings and hours worked are ascertainable, “the determination of the 
regular rate becomes a matter of mathematical computation[.]” Bay Ridge, 334 U.S. at 461 
(citations and quotes omitted). 
To calculate the regular rate, the employer must divide the total straight-time earnings by the total 
hours worked in that same workweek.  Then, the employee’s overtime premium is calculated by 
dividing the regular rate in half (yielding the “half-time” rate) and multiplying that amount by the 
FLSA overtime hours worked to obtain the FLSA overtime premium pay due for the workweek.  
See 29 C.F.R. § 778.110.  Of relevance to your request, section 7(e)(3) of the Act permits an 
employer to exclude from the regular rate “[s]ums paid in recognition of services performed during 
a given period” if “both the fact that payment is to be made and the amount of the payment are 
determined at the sole discretion of the employer at or near the end of the period and not pursuant 
to any prior contract, agreement, or promise causing the employee to expect such payments 
 
2 The bonus plan criteria also provides for adjustments for the “[a]ctual cost of repair or replacement” if 
there is “[v]ehicle or property damage” when determining whether or to what extent a bonus might be 
earned.  There is no indication in the materials submitted that any bonus plan criteria ever reduces a driver’s 
base hourly rate.  Business costs, however, cannot be passed along to an employee to the extent that doing 
so (whether through payroll deduction or otherwise) results in an underpayment of the minimum wage or 
an employee’s overtime premium pay.  See Brennan v. Veterans Cleaning Serv., Inc., 482 F.2d 1362, 1369–
70 (5th Cir. 1973) (citing 29 C.F.R. § 531.35 and holding that the FLSA prohibits deductions from 
employees’ pay to cover damages to a company vehicle to the extent such deductions reduce employee’s 
pay below the minimum wage). 
--- page 3 ---
3 
 
regularly[.]” 29 U.S.C. § 207(e)(3).  Such a payment is often termed a “discretionary” bonus.  See 
29 C.F.R. § 778.211. 
OPINION 
Based on the specific facts described in your letter, the employer must include the bonus payments 
in the regular rate of pay in any workweek for which they are earned, because such payments are 
incentives and do not qualify as a discretionary bonus or meet any other section 7(e) exclusion. 
Accordingly, the employer has failed to pay in full the overtime premium—i.e., the “half-time” 
premium—to employees who received the safety, job duties, and performance bonus. 
A. Additional incentive bonus payments must be included in the regular rate. 
Section 7(e)(3) of the FLSA requires that three conditions be satisfied for a payment to qualify as 
an excludable discretionary bonus: (1) the fact and amount of the payment must be “determined at 
the sole discretion of the employer”; (2) the employer’s determination must occur “at or near the 
end of the period” when the employee’s work was performed; and (3) the payment must not be 
made “pursuant to any prior contract, agreement, or promise causing the employee to expect such 
payments regularly[.]”  29 U.S.C. § 207(e)(3).  Here, the bonus payments are not discretionary 
because, although the decision to offer the bonuses and on what terms was initially at the 
employer’s discretion, the fact and amount of such payments are not made at the “sole discretion 
of the employer at or near the end of the period” in which the work is performed.  Id.; 29 C.F.R. 
§ 778.211(a).  Rather, the amount of the bonus is calculated using a predetermined plan to 
incentivize certain work performance.  Thus, regardless of whether the plan used by the employer 
to calculate any bonus payments constitutes a prior contract, agreement, or promise, the first two 
statutory requirements of an excludable discretionary bonus are not satisfied. 
The employer’s plan sets forth criteria such that, once met, the corresponding amount of the bonus 
is quantifiable under the plan and earned by the eligible employee.  Thus, because the policy 
automatically triggers the bonus upon meeting the criteria, the employer has effectively 
“abandoned” its discretion with respect to the fact and amount of the payment.  See 29 C.F.R. 
§ 778.211(b) (“If the employer promises in advance to pay a bonus, he has abandoned his 
discretion with regard to it.”).  Moreover, although opinions may differ when deciding whether a 
particular criterion is satisfied (e.g., whether a vehicle was returned in “clean” condition), such 
differences do not change the non-discretionary nature of the payment because it is not subject to 
the sole discretion of the employer—as eligibility for, and the amount of, the bonus are based on 
terms predetermined before performance.  See 29 U.S.C. § 207(e)(3); 29 C.F.R. § 778.211(b) 
(stating that abandonment of discretion as to “the amount of the bonus though not with regard to 
the fact of payment,” results in a non-discretionary bonus); see also WHD Opinion Letter 
FLSA2004-11 at 3 (Sept. 21, 2004) (explaining that where bonus “criteria [are] tied to productivity 
in any way and [are] not at the sole discretion of the employer,” the resulting bonus is non-
discretionary and must be included in the regular rate).  Accordingly, the incentive bonus 
payments, as described, do not meet the criteria of a discretionary bonus under section 7(e)(3), nor 
any other statutory exclusion from the regular rate.  As such, the payments must be included in the 
employees’ regular rate used to calculate overtime premiums.  See 29 C.F.R. § 778.211(c); see 
also id. § 778.208. 
--- page 4 ---
4 
 
Moreover, because the bonus plan you describe is meant to induce employees to meet certain 
performance metrics, and foreknowledge is a critical component of incentivizing employees to 
perform, we assume that your employer communicates the requirements of this bonus to the 
employees before any work is performed.  This foreknowledge further supports the bonus being 
understood as a non-discretionary bonus that must be included in the regular rate of pay.  See 29 
C.F.R. § 778.211(c) (“Bonuses which are announced to employees to induce them to work more 
steadily or more rapidly or more efficiently . . . are regarded as part of the regular rate of pay.”). 
B. Overtime premium pay should be calculated using one half of an employee’s regular 
rate of pay for the relevant workweek. 
Having established that the employer must include the bonus in the regular rate of pay, we turn to 
how to calculate overtime premiums properly for the employees described in your request.  Here, 
the employer calculates the hourly bonus such that, even though the amount is not ascertainable 
until the completion of the pay period, the employer can allocate the bonus based on the hours 
worked in each of the relevant workweeks and calculate any overtime premium pay due for each 
separate workweek. 
Your letter describes an employee who works 50 hours in a workweek, is paid a base hourly wage 
of $12.00, and also receives $9.50 per hour in bonuses ($1.50 for efficiency and $8.00 for 
safety/performance) for all hours worked.  This results in a regular rate of $21.50 per hour. You 
correctly concluded that the employee was due $21.50 for all hours worked up to 40 and $32.25 
(1.5 × $21.50) for each overtime hour. 
You state: “By excluding these bonuses, the company pays overtime at $18.00 ($12.00 × 1.5), 
resulting in a shortfall of $14.25 per overtime hour ($32.25 - $18.00)[.]”  However, this calculation 
overlooks that, in your hypothetical, the employee received the $9.50 bonus for all 50 hours 
worked, including each of the 10 overtime hours, in addition to the $12.00 wage.  The employer 
actually paid $27.50 for each overtime hour: $21.50 in straight-time earnings plus a $6.00 
premium.  Thus, the correct overtime shortfall is $4.75 per hour, not $14.25. 
By way of another example: 
James earns a base hourly rate of $12.00 per hour and works a total of 50 hours in a workweek 
in which, based on the predetermined incentive terms, the employer pays an additional $5.60 per 
hour for all hours worked as a non-discretionary bonus.  His total straight-time earnings are 
$880.00 ((50 hours × $12.00) + (50 hours × $5.60)).3  His regular rate for the workweek is 
therefore $17.60 ($880.00 ÷ 50 hours) and the half-time rate is $8.80 ($17.60 × 0.5).  Thus, he is 
entitled to an additional $8.80 per hour for each overtime hour worked for a total overtime 
premium of $88.00 ($8.80 × 10 overtime hours), increasing his total wages to $968.00 ($880.00 
(straight-time earnings for all hours worked) + $88.00 (half-time due for all hours worked over 
40 per workweek)). 
Notably, employers may structure bonuses to require employees to meet certain conditions, 
including adherence to safety protocols, codes of conduct, or performance targets, consistent with 
 
3 Alternatively, an employer would reach the same result if it structured this equation for hourly-based pay 
components using the distributive property: 50 hours × ($12.00 + $5.60) = $880.00. 
--- page 5 ---
5 
 
the requirements of the FLSA. Such bonus plans may rely on a variety of factors or criteria such 
that the amount of an employee’s bonus ultimately earned may vary from workweek to workweek.  
But if a bonus plan neither satisfies the requirements of 29 U.S.C. § 207(e)(3), nor fits within 
another statutory exclusion, any bonus payment made must be included in the employee’s regular 
rate for overtime purposes.  Employers must heed to these core principles, imbued throughout the 
Act, when structuring pay components to achieve business objectives in a legally compliant 
manner. 
This letter is an official interpretation of the governing statutes and regulations by the 
Administrator of the Wage and Hour Division of the United States Department of Labor for 
purposes of the Portal-to-Portal Act.  See 29 U.S.C. § 259.  This interpretation may be relied upon 
in accordance with section 10 of the Portal-to-Portal Act, notwithstanding that after any such act 
or omission in the course of such reliance, the interpretation is “modified or rescinded or is 
determined by judicial authority to be invalid or of no legal effect.”  Id. 
We trust that this letter is responsive to your inquiry. 
Sincerely, 
Andrew B. Rogers 
Administrator 
*Note: The actual name(s) was removed to protect privacy in accordance with 5 U.S.C. 
§ 552(b)(6).  You represent that you do not seek this opinion for any party that the Wage and Hour 
Division (WHD) is currently investigating or for any litigation that commenced prior to your 
request.  This opinion is based exclusively on the facts and circumstances described in your request 
and is given based on your representation, express or implied, that you have provided a full and 
fair description of all the facts and circumstances that would be pertinent to our consideration of 
the question presented.  The existence of any other factual or historical background not contained 
in your letter might require a conclusion different from the one expressed herein. 

--- page 6 ---
U.S. Department of Labor Wage and Hour Division 
Washington, DC 20210 
 
 
 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        
 
September 30, 2025 
Dear Name*: 
This letter responds to your request for an opinion addressing whether “emergency pay” provided 
to you and other firefighters in your city can be excluded from the  regular rate of pay when 
calculating overtime premiums under section 7(e) of the Fair Labor Standards Act (FLSA)  or, 
alternatively, how to include this payment in the regular rate.  
It is our opinion that, under the circumstances presented and limited to the specific facts set forth 
in the request, the “emergency pay” is not excludable from the regular rate of pay because the fact 
and amount of the payment are not within the sole discretion of the employer at or near the end of 
the work period, and the pay does not otherwise fit within a statutory exclusion. Accordingly, the 
employer at issue should include “emergency pay” earned for hours worked within the regular rate 
for purposes of overtime premium calculations using the method described below.  
This opinion is based exclusively on the facts as presented below that you provided to the 
Department and may not apply to different facts in this or other situations. 
BACKGROUND 
You describe yourself as a f irefighter/paramedic employed by a city government in Texas. The 
city has a written policy for emergency pay through which—in relevant part —firefighters and 
certain other non-exempt employees are paid a premium payment of one half the employee’s 
regular hourly rate of pay, which we assume means an employee’s base or usual hourly rate, for 
every hour worked during an “emergency period.” The city’s policy defines emergency periods as 
periods when, due to a  disaster or emergency  declaration as defined by the city , only some 
“designated emergency employees” must work.  You state that although employee job duties 
“substantially remain the same” during certain emergency pay periods, “the extreme weather 
environment makes those duties more likely to cause physical hardship” for firefighters. 
You assert that the emergency pay at issue  should be included in the regular rate of pay used to 
calculate employee overtime premiums on the basis that it does not fall within any of the statutory 
exclusions from the regular rate provided in section 7(e) of the FLSA. See  29 U.S.C. § 207( e). 
Additionally, you assert that, as to firefighters specifically, the emergency pay constitutes “hazard 
pay,” which, in your understanding, should be included in the regular rate.  
GENERAL LEGAL PRINCIPLES 
The FLSA requires payment “at a rate not less than one and one-half times the regular rate at which 
[the employee] is employed” to all non- exempt employees for all hours worked over 40 hours in 
a workweek. 29 U.S.C. § 207(a)(1).  The “regular rate”  must include “all remuneration for 
employment paid to, or on behalf of, the employee,” and must reflect all payments earned during 
the workweek, exclusive of overtime payments. Id. at § 207(e); Bay Ridge Operating Co. v. Aaron, 
FLSA2025-04 
--- page 7 ---
 
 
2 
 
334 U.S. 446, 461 (1948); see also Madison v. Res. for Human Dev., Inc., 233 F.3d 175, 187 (3d 
Cir. 2000) (“[T]here is a statutory presumption . . . that remuneration in any form is included in 
the regular rate calculation.”). 
The regular rate is subject to eight statutory exclusions  provided in section 7(e) of the FLSA . 29 
U.S.C. § 207(e). Relevant to this letter , section 7(e)(3) permits an employer to exclude from the 
regular rate “sums paid in recognition of services performed during a given period” if “both the 
fact that payment is to be made and the amount of the payment are determined at the sole discretion 
of the employer at or near the end of the period a nd not made pursuant to any prior contract, 
agreement, or promise causing the employee to expect such payments regularly.” Id . at 
§ 207(e)(3); see also 29 CFR 778.211. Such a payment is often termed a “discretionary bonus.” 
Additionally, sections 7(e)(5), (6), and (7) of the FLSA provide that c ertain premium payments 
made by employers for work in excess or outside of specified daily or weekly periods or on certain 
special days are regarded as overtime premiums  which may be excluded from an employee’s 
regular rate of pay. See 29 U.S.C. § 207(e)(5)–(7).  However, “extra compensation provided by 
premium rates other than those described in the statute ,” such as “nightshift differentials” a nd 
“premiums paid for hazardous, arduous [,] or dirty work,”  “cannot be treated as overtime 
premiums.” 29 CFR 778.207. When such premiums are paid, they must be included in a non-
exempt employee’s regular rate of pay. Id. 
OPINION 
Based on the specific facts described in your letter, the emergency pay at issue does not qualify as 
a discretionary bonus that may be excluded from an employee’s regular rate of pay. The emergency 
pay also does not fall under any other exclusion from the regular rate of pay under section 7(e) of 
the FLSA. Accordingly, under the facts you provided, in workweeks when the city pays emergency 
pay, the emergency pay must be include d when determining the regular rate of pay  used to 
calculate employee overtime premiums. 
The FLSA requires that three conditions be satisfied for a payment to qualify as an excludable  
discretionary bonus : (1) the fact and amount of the payment must be “determined at the sole 
discretion of the employer” ; (2) the employer’s determination must occur “at or near the end of 
the period” when the employee’s work was performed;  and (3) the payment must not be made 
pursuant to “any prior contract, agreement, or promise” causing employees to expect such 
payments regularly. 29 U.S.C. § 207(e)(3).  Here, regardless of whether the city’s policy would 
constitute a prior contract, agreement, or promise, the first two conditions are not satisfied. 
Although the existence and terms of when emergency pay is available may be at the employer’s 
discretion, the emergency pay at issue is not “determined at the sole discretion of the employer” 
once the employee has performed the work under those terms . Specifically, the policy leaves no 
discretion as to whether to provide emergency pay during an emergency period when  emergency 
work is performed, nor does it leave discretion regarding the amount of the payment as the amount 
is set at one half of the employee’s base hourly rate of pay. Moreover, the fact and amount of the 
emergency pay are determined well before the emergency work is performed —further evidence 
that the payment is non-discretionary in nature. Id. Accordingly, the emergency pay, as described, 
does not meet the criteria of a discretionary bonus under section 7(e)(3). 
--- page 8 ---
 
 
3 
 
Similarly, the emergency pay under the specific facts described in your letter also does not qualify 
as an excludable overtime premium under sections 7(e)(5), (6), or (7) for the following reasons: 
• The emergency pay is not excludable under section 7(e)(5) because it is not contingent 
upon the employee working in excess of  any particular amount of hours, i.e. , working 
beyond 8 hours in a day , 40 hours in a workweek, or the employee’s “normal working 
hours or regular working hours.” 29 U.S.C. § 207(e)(5). 
• The emergency pay is not excludable under section 7(e) (6) because it is not contingent 
upon the work being performed “on Saturdays, Sundays, holidays, or regular days of rest, 
or on the sixth or seventh day of the workweek.” 29 U.S.C. § 207(e)(6). The emergency 
periods described in the city’s policy may or may not fall on such “special days,” and, 
importantly, the emergency pay is not limited to or paid because of such days. 
• The emergency pay is not excludable under section 7(e)(7) because, regardless of whether 
the city’s policy would constitute an employment contract, the pay is not contingent upon 
the work being performed outside “ the basic, normal, or regular workday … [or] 
workweek” of the employee. 29 U.S.C. § 207(e)(7). 
Rather, based upon your representations, we agree with you that the emergency pay does not 
qualify as an excludable overtime premium. As such, the emergency pay should be included in the 
regular rate of pay used to calculate overtime premiums for any non-exempt city employees who 
receive such pay.  
To determine the FLSA’s overtime premium pay, the employer first must calculate the employee’s 
regular rate. The regular rate is calculated on a workweek -by-workweek basis.
0F
1 “The rule for 
determining the regular rate of pay is to divide the wages actually  paid by the hours actually  
worked in any workweek”. Bay Ridge Operating Co., 334 U.S. at 460– 61; see also Overnight 
Motor Transp. Co. v. Missel , 316 U.S. 572, 580 (1942) (“Wage divided by hours equals regular 
rate”).1F
2 
First, the employer must total the  employee’s “straight-time” earnings (except section 7(e) 
statutory exclusions) actually paid for that workweek. Then, the employer must total all the hours 
actually worked in that same workweek. Once the straight-time earnings and hours worked are  
ascertainable, “the determination of the regular rate becomes a matter of mathematical 
computation”. Bay Ridge Operating Co., 334 U.S. at 461 (citations and quotes omitted ). To 
calculate the regular rate, t he employer must divide the total straight-time earnings by the total 
hours worked. Finally, to obtain the overtime premium owed for that workweek, the employer 
 
1 Section 7(k) of the FLSA provides a partial overtime exemption for any employee of a public agency engaged in fire 
protection activities or any employee engaged in law enforcement activities. See 29 U.S.C. 207(k). Under this 
provision, whether overtime pay  is owed may be determined based on a “work period” of 7 to 28 consecutive days. 
Section 7(k) impacts the determination of wh ether overtime pay is due and therefore does not impact this opinion 
letter—which concerns how to calculate the regular rate when overtime pay is due.  
2 You asked whether overtime could be determined in accordance with 29 CFR 778.115. The regular rate computation 
as described here, and in the example provided below, are first principles. The provision at 29 CFR 778.115, on the 
other hand, is an illustration that would produce the same result.  
--- page 9 ---
 
 
4 
 
must divide the regular rate in half  and multiply that amount, per hour, by all overtime hours 
worked. 
 By way of example:  
John earns a base hourly rate of $20.00 per hour and works a total of 50 hours in a 
workweek, 20 hours of which are during emergency pay hours  for which he 
receives a premium of one-half his base hourly rate. His total straight-time earnings 
would be (50 hours × $20) + (20 hours × $20 × 0.5) = $1,200. His regular rate for 
the workweek would therefore be ($1,200 ÷ 50 hours) = $24.00. Thus, he would be 
entitled to an additional $12 for each overtime hour worked ($24 × 0.5), for a total 
of $120 ($12 × 10 overtime hours), and a grand total of $1,320. 
Finally, you asked whether, as to firefighters , the emergency pay would qualify as “hazard pay”  
given that firefighters’ work during emergency periods is “more likely to cause physical hardship.” 
The Department need not address this question because it is unnecessary to determining  whether 
the “emergency pay” is included in the regular rate. 
We trust that this letter is responsive to your inquiry. 
Sincerely, 
 
James R. Macy 
Acting Administrator 
*Note: The actual name(s) was removed to protect privacy in accordance with 5 U.S.C. 
§ 552(b)(6).  You represent that you do not seek this opinion for any party that the Wage and Hour 
Division (WHD) is currently investigating or for any litigation that commenced prior to your 
request. This opinion is based exclusively on the facts and circumstances described in your request 
and is given based on your representation, express or implied, that you have provided a full and 
fair description of all the facts and circumstances that would be pe rtinent to our consideration of 
the question presented. The existence of any other factual or historical background not contained 
in your letter might require a conclusion different from the one expressed herein. This is an official 
ruling for purposes of the Portal-to-Portal Act, 29 U.S.C. § 259. 

--- page 10 ---
U.S.  Department of Labor Wage and Hour Division 
Washington, D.C. 20210 
FLSA2026-1 
January 5, 2026 
Dear Name*: 
This letter responds to your request for an opinion regarding your reclassification from exempt to 
non-exempt status despite your belief that you continue to satisfy the educational and job duties 
criteria of an exempt “learned professional” under section 13(a)(1) of the Fair Labor Standards Act 
(FLSA or Act). 
It is our opinion that, under the circumstances presented, the discontinuation of supervisory 
responsibilities would not preclude your classification as an exempt learned professional, although 
your change from being paid on a salary basis to being paid on an hourly basis would likely defeat 
the exemption.  Moreover, even if you do meet the tests for the learned professional exemption, 
your employer may nonetheless choose to classify you as non-exempt. 
BACKGROUND 
You represent that you are employed as a Licensed Clinical Social Worker (LCSW) for a healthcare 
organization. Since receiving your professional license in 2018, you state that your employer has 
classified you as a “salaried (exempt)” employee. 1  You assert that your core job duties include: 
clinical assessments and psychosocial evaluations ; treatment planning and documentation; 
participation in interdisciplinary care teams; crisis intervention and discharge planning; and 
consistent application of professional discretion and judgment in clinical decisions.  In 2020, you 
became a supervisor and assumed supervisory responsibilities. 
You state that your employer has recently undergone an internal restructuring and advised that you 
would be reclassified to “hourly (non-exempt),” and that your supervisory role will be 
discontinued.  Consequently, you state that your employer has decided to reclassify your position 
from exempt to non-exempt on the basis that you are no longer a supervisor.  You assert that your 
role continues to be clinical and aligned with the FLSA’s exemption for learned professionals, as 
defined in 29 C.F.R. § 541.301.  Although you have not provided any information on the academic 
prerequisites for your position, you state that you are a LCSW in the state of Utah, which we note 
requires a master’s or doctoral degree in social work to qualify for professional licensure.  See 
Utah Code Ann. § 58-60-205(1)(c). 
1 Although employees and employers often use the terms “salaried” and “exempt” interchangeably, they are 
not synonyms. Payment on a salary basis alone does not make an employee exempt from the minimum 
wage or overtime provisions of the Act; an employee also generally must meet a salary level test and meet 
various duty requirements.  Indeed, while the FLSA ’s exemption for learned professional employees 
generally requires that exempt employees receive a salary, not all exemptions do.  Moreover, the Act does 
not prohibit paying non-exempt employees a salary, as long as the proper overtime premium is also paid. 
--- page 11 ---
2 
You have asked the Division to address whether your role meets the criteria for the FLSA’s learned 
professional exemption and, if so, whether your employer is nevertheless permitted to pay you on 
an hourly basis and reclassify you as a non-exempt employee. 
GENERAL LEGAL PRINCIPLES 
The FLSA generally requires covered employers to pay employees at least the federal minimum 
wage (currently $7.25 an  hour) for all  hours worked and overtime premium pay of at least one-
half times the employee’s regular rate of pay for all hours worked over 40 in a workweek.  See 29 
U.S.C. §§ 206(a), 207(a).  These  wage and hour requirements are minimum standards, a federal 
floor, and the Act does not prohibit an employer from paying more than the federal minimum wage 
or establishing a more generous policy for overtime pay.  See 29 U.S.C. § 218(a). 
The Act includes numerous exemptions from its wage and hour requirements. Of relevance to your 
request, section  13(a)(1) of the  FLSA provides an exemption from  both minimum wage and 
overtime pay requirements for any employee employed in a “bona fide executive, administrative, 
or professional capacity.”  29 U.S.C. § 213(a)(1).  Regulations which define and delimit  these 
exemptions are set forth at  29 C.F.R. Part 541, including compensation and duties criteria for 
exempt “learned professionals” in Subparts D and G. 
The learned professional exemption requires that the employee’s “primary duty” must involve the 
performance of “work requiring advanced knowledge” “in a field of science or learning” which is 
“customarily acquired by a prolonged course of specialized intellectual instruction.”  29 C.F.R. 
§ 541.301(a).  By contrast, the “executive employee” exemption applies to those who customarily 
and regularly direct the work of two or more other full-time employees or their equivalent, among 
other requirements.  See 29 C.F.R. §§ 541.100, 541.104.
OPINION 
Based on the  facts provided in your letter, it  is likely that  your primary  duty necessitates the 
requisite advanced knowledge and academic requirements to qualify you as an exempt learned 
professional. 29 U.S.C. § 213(a)(1).   WHD has previously explained that  “Social Workers with 
master’s degrees who work in the field of their degree[] will generally meet” the duties 
requirements for exemption, WHD Opinion Letter FLSA2005-50 (Nov. 4, 2005), and we assume, 
based on licensing requirements for LCSWs in your state  (Utah), that your professional license 
similarly requires that you hold at least a master’s degree in a relevant field. Cf. Solis v. Washington, 
656 F.3d 1079, 1088 (9th Cir. 2011) (holding that   “[a]n educational  requirement that may be 
satisfied by [bachelor’s] degrees in fields as diverse as anthropology, education, criminal justice, 
and gerontology”  was not “sufficiently specialized and  relate[d] directly”  to the  social work 
positions at issue for purposes of the learned professional exemption).  Notably, the possession of 
a professional license and master’s degree does not alone establish that you are an exempt learned 
professional; additionally, as part of your primary  duty, you must  perform work requiring that 
advanced knowledge.  See 29 C.F.R. § 541.301(a)(1), (b).  It appears from the description of your 
core job duties— e.g., making clinical  assessments and psychosocial evaluations, planning 
treatments, participating in interdisciplinary care  teams, among others—that  you are performing 
work which requires your advanced knowledge “in a field of science or learning.” 
--- page 12 ---
3 
However, for the learned professional exemption to apply, an employee must additionally meet the 
compensation requirements. See 29 C.F.R. §§ 541.300(a); 541.600; 541.602.  Based on your letter, 
we have assumed that your prior pay structure met the compensation requirements set forth in 
detail at 29 C.F.R. §§ 541.600 and 541.602. 2  But if, as your letter suggests, your compensation 
has changed to hourly, you would likely no longer meet the compensation criteria, and would no 
longer qualify for the exemption, even if your duties remain the same.  Your letter does not contain 
enough information about your compensation to determine whether these requirements are met. 3 
Ultimately, even if all the criteria for an FLSA exemption are met, it is the employer—not the 
employee—that claims the exemption.  In other words, the Act does not require an employer to 
classify as exempt an employee who meets the requirements of an exemption.  Rather, employers 
have the discretion to classify such employees as non-exempt as long as they pay at least the federal 
minimum wage for all hours worked and the overtime premium for work in excess of 40 hours in 
a workweek.  Employers may decide not to classify any qualified employees as exempt or only a 
subset of employees (including managers, particular grades or compensation levels, corporate 
office location, and others).  Please note that, although non-exempt employees are subject to 
certain recordkeeping requirements which do not apply to exempt individuals employed in an 
executive, administrative, or professional capacity, see 29 C.F.R. § 516.3, an employer may decide 
to provide its non-exempt employees with pay structures, employment benefits, and scheduling 
flexibility similar to those it provides to its exempt employees. 
Finally, you also ask whether your employer is permitted to reclassify an exempt employee as non-
exempt solely due to a change in organizational structure.  The FLSA only prohibits the 
misclassification of a non-exempt employee as an exempt one.  Thus, employers can and do make 
lawful business decisions to not apply an exemption.  There is no indication based on the facts 
provided that this action violates the Act, assuming that your wages were calculated properly for 
the workweek in which the transition occurred.  Although your employer retains the prerogative 
to classify you as a non-exempt employee, the analysis above may help you in discussing the 
nature and terms of your employment with your employer. 
This letter is an official interpretation of the governing statutes and regulations by the 
Administrator of the Wage and Hour Division of the United States Department of Labor for 
purposes of the Portal-to-Portal Act.  See 29 U.S.C. § 259.  This interpretation may be relied upon 
in accordance with section 10 of the Portal-to-Portal Act, notwithstanding that after any such act 
or omission in the course of such reliance, the interpretation is “modified or rescinded or is 
determined by judicial authority to be invalid or of no legal effect.”  Id. 
2 Please note that due to ongoing litigation concerning an update to the salary level test issued in 2024 that 
was subsequently vacated, see Texas & Plano Chamber of Commerce v. U.S. Dep’ t of Labor, 756 F. Supp. 
3d 361 (E.D. Tex. 2024), the Department is currently enforcing a $684 per week salary level requirement. 
3 To satisfy the  learned professional  exemption, an employer  must pay the  employee at or above the 
regulatory threshold (referenced above) on a “salary basis,” defined at 29 C.F.R. § 541.602, a “fee basis,” 
defined at  29 C. F.R. § 541.605, or  a time-based rate that includes a minimum guarantee that bears a 
reasonable relationship (e.g., a ratio of 1.5-to-1 or less) to the employee’s usual time-based earnings. See 
29 C.F.R. § 541.604(b); WHD Opinion Letter FLSA2018-25 (Nov. 8, 2018) (stating that a ratio of 1.8-
to-1 is impermissible). 
--- page 13 ---
4 
We trust that this letter is responsive to your inquiry. 
Sincerely, 
Andrew B. Rogers 
Administrator 
*Note: The actual name(s) was removed to protect privacy in accordance with 5 U.S.C.
§ 552(b)(6).  You represent that you do not seek this opinion for any party that the Wage and Hour
Division (WHD) is currently investigating or for any litigation that commenced prior to your
request.  This opinion is based exclusively on the facts and circumstances described in your request
and is given based on your representation, express or implied, that you have provided a full and
fair description of all the facts and circumstances that would be pertinent to our consideration of
the question presented.  The existence of any other factual or historical background not contained
in your letter might require a conclusion different from the one expressed herein.

--- page 14 ---
U.S.  Department of Labor    Wage and Hour Division 
  Washington, D.C.  20210 
 
 
 
FLSA2026-5 
May 28, 2026 
Dear Name*: 
This letter responds to your request for an opinion regarding whether an employee exempt pursuant 
to section 13(a)(1) of the Fair Labor Standards Act (FLSA or Act) can perform additional work in 
a secondary, non-exempt role at an hourly rate, and if so, what, if any overtime implications arise. 
It is our opinion that, under the circumstances presented, the performance of additional non-exempt 
work at an hourly rate is insufficient to alter the employee’s exempt status under the FLSA as long 
as the employee’s primary duty remains the performance of exempt work and the salary 
requirements continue to be met.  As such, this arrangement does not intrinsically present overtime 
implications. 
BACKGROUND 
You represent that you are employed by an organization that is an academic medical center and 
operates as a non-profit acute care hospital.  This hospital employs staff in various capacities, 
including in “Staff Nurse” and “Nursing Professional Development Specialist” (Specialist) 
positions. 
The main functions of a Staff Nurse include formulating clinical decisions for patients utilizing a 
multi-dimensional plan of care with the nursing process, demonstrating respect for patient rights 
and privacy, serving as an advocate, assisting in orientation of new employees, and delegating 
tasks to other personnel.  The main functions of a Specialist include identifying gaps in learning 
opportunities, designing educational programs, onboarding new staff, advancing the professional 
development of all staff, and conducting ongoing competency processes.  The Specialist might 
perform the same interventions as a Staff Nurse, including educating and assisting the latter, but a 
Specialist does not replace the Staff Nurse as a patient’s primary nurse.  Nevertheless, a Specialist 
exercises significant autonomy and applies judgment on when and where to provide support to 
Staff Nurses. 
You indicate that the employer pays Staff Nurses on an hourly basis, plus additional compensation 
in the form of night and weekend differentials and bonuses for picking up shifts.  The employer 
classifies Staff Nurses as non-exempt and, as such, these employees are eligible for overtime 
compensation.  In contrast, the employer classifies Specialists as exempt from minimum wage and 
overtime compensation; pays them a salary, currently approximately $4,000 per bi-weekly pay 
period; and affords no additional compensation for hours worked over 40 in a workweek in the 
Specialist role.  You explain that Specialists may, and often do, pick up shifts in the Staff Nurse 
role.  Specialists typically pick up one, and occasionally two, 12-hour shifts as Staff Nurses per 
week on weekends in addition to their approximately 40 hours worked Monday through Friday in 
the Specialist role.  Thus, these shifts typically make up about 23 percent, and occasionally about 
38 percent, of the Specialists’ total hours worked per week.  Based on information you provided, 
--- page 15 ---
 
 
2 
the employer pays Specialists an hourly rate for such additional work, and the hourly rate is 
approximately equivalent to the Specialist’s guaranteed weekly salary divided by 40 hours. 
You ask whether an employer can employ an individual in both an exempt capacity (i.e., a 
Specialist) and non-exempt capacity (i.e., Staff Nurse).  You also ask what overtime implications 
may arise if an individual is employed in both exempt and non-exempt roles. 
GENERAL LEGAL PRINCIPLES 
A. The Act  
The FLSA generally requires covered employers to pay employees at least the federal minimum 
wage ($7.25 an hour) for all hours worked and overtime at a rate of not less than one and one-half 
times the employee’s regular rate of pay for all hours worked over 40 in a workweek.  See 29 
U.S.C. §§ 206(a), 207(a).  These wage and hour requirements are minimum standards, and the Act 
does not prohibit an employer from establishing more generous terms.  See 29 U.S.C. § 218(a). 
The FLSA includes several exemptions from its wage and hour requirements, including section 
13(a)(1),1 which exempts from both the minimum wage and overtime requirements any employee 
employed in a “bona fide executive, administrative, or professional capacity.”  29 U.S.C. 
§ 213(a)(1).  When construing or applying the Act, the Division must give the text a “fair … 
interpretation.”  Encino Motorcars, LLC v. Navarro, 584 U.S. 79, 88–89 (2018) (cleaned up); see 
also CTS Corp. v. Waldburger, 573 U.S. 1, 12 (2014); WHD Op. Ltr. FLSA2026-4 (Jan. 5, 2026); 
WHD Op. Ltr. FLSA2021-3 (Jan. 15, 2021).  Accordingly, WHD applies a “fair reading” standard 
to all FLSA provisions, including the section 13(a)(1) exemption.  A fair reading is “neither narrow 
nor broad,” Dep’t of Lab. v. Bristol Excavating, Inc., 935 F.3d 122, 135 (3d Cir. 2019), and requires 
the Division to “interpret each FLSA exemption the same way [it] would any other statutory 
provision—with full attention to its text.”  Munoz-Gonzalez v. D.L.C. Limousine Serv., 904 F.3d 
208, 216 (2d Cir. 2018). 
B. Requirements of the Section 13(a)(1) Exemption 
Though the section 13(a)(1) exemption from both minimum wage and overtime pay requirements 
can be claimed2 for any employee employed in a “bona fide executive, administrative, or 
professional capacity[,]” the FLSA does not define the terms “executive,” “administrative,” or 
“professional.”  Rather, the Act directs the Secretary of Labor to define and delimit those terms.  
Pursuant to explicit rulemaking authority, the Secretary, through the Administrator of the Wage 
and Hour Division, has issued regulations to define and delimit the section 13(a)(1) exemption, 
including compensation and duties criteria, since 1938.  See 29 U.S.C. § 213(a)(1); 29 C.F.R. Part 
541; see also 3 Fed. Reg. 2518 (Oct. 20, 1938); Secretary’s Order 01-2014 (Dec. 19, 2024), 79 
Fed. Reg. 77527 (Dec. 24, 2014).ௗ 
 
1 See section 13, subsection (a), paragraph (1) of the FLSA. 
2 See WHD Op. Ltr. FLSA2026-1 (Jan. 5, 2026) (explaining that even if all criteria for an FLSA exemption 
are met, it is the employer—not the employee—that claims the exemption). 
--- page 16 ---
 
 
3 
1. Primary Duty 
As explained in the regulations, for the section 13(a)(1) exemption to apply, an employee’s 
“primary duty” must be the performance of exempt work.  See 29 C.F.R. §§ 541.700, 541.702.  
The phrase “primary duty” means: 
[The] principal, main, major or most important duty that the employee performs.  
Determination of an employee’s primary duty must be based on all the facts in a 
particular case, with the major emphasis on the character of the employee’s job as 
a whole.  Factors to consider when determining the primary duty of an employee 
include, but are not limited to, the relative importance of the exempt duties as 
compared with other types of duties; the amount of time spent performing exempt 
work; the employee’s relative freedom from direct supervision; and the relationship 
between the employee’s salary and the wages paid to other employees for the kind 
of non-exempt work performed by the employee. 
29 C.F.R. § 541.700(a). 
The regulation further provides that “the amount of time spent performing exempt work can be a 
useful guide in determining whether exempt work is the primary duty of an employee,” and thus, 
an employee who spends more than 50 percent of his time performing qualifying exempt work 
will generally satisfy the primary duty requirement.  Id. § 541.700(b).  However, the regulation 
sets forth a more qualitative analysis, and thus, an employee’s status cannot necessarily be inferred 
solely from time spent.  See id. (“Employees who do not spend more than 50 percent of their time 
performing exempt duties may nonetheless meet the primary duty requirement if the other factors 
support such a conclusion”).3  Accordingly, for an employee to qualify for the exemption, “there 
is no strict percentage limitation on the performance of non-exempt work” as long as the 
employee’s primary duty remains the performance of exempt work.  69 Fed. Reg. 22122, 22137 
(Apr. 23, 2004).   
2. Salary Basis and Level 
In addition to the duties requirements, to qualify as exempt under section 13(a)(1), an employee 
must be compensated on a salary basis at a rate equaling or exceeding the level specified in the 
regulations.  29 C.F.R. § 541.602(a); see generally 29 C.F.R. Part 541, Subpart G.4  The salary 
basis requirement is met “if the employee regularly receives each pay period . . . a predetermined 
amount constituting all or part of the employee’s compensation, which amount is not subject to 
reduction because of variations in the quality or quantity of the work performed.”  29 C.F.R. 
§ 541.602(a).  With limited exceptions, “an exempt employee must receive the full salary for any 
 
3 See also 29 C.F.R. § 541.700(a) (“Factors to consider when determining the primary duty of an employee 
include, but are not limited to, the relative importance of the exempt duties as compared with other types 
of duties; the amount of time spent performing exempt work; the employee’s relative freedom from direct 
supervision; and the relationship between the employee’s salary and the wages paid to other employees for 
the kind of nonexempt work performed by the employee.”). 
4 The minimum salary level is $684 per week.  See 29 C.F.R. § 541.600 (2020); see also 91 Fed. Reg. 
27833–27837. 
--- page 17 ---
 
 
4 
week in which the employee performs any work without regard to the number of days or hours 
worked.”  Id.  Nevertheless, as discussed at length below, a salaried employee may receive 
additional compensation in most circumstances without losing the exemption, if the employee is 
guaranteed at least the minimum weekly-required amount paid on a salary basis.  29 C.F.R. 
§ 541.604(a). 
OPINION 
Based on your representations and for present purposes, we assume that an employee working at 
the hospital solely as a Specialist would meet all the applicable duties, salary level, and salary basis 
requirements for an exempt employee pursuant to section 13(a)(1) of the FLSA and 29 C.F.R. Part 
541.5  Likewise, we also assume an employee working at the hospital solely as a Staff Nurse would 
not meet any of the requirements for a section 13(a)(1) exemption and, therefore, would be non-
exempt.6  We turn now to your question regarding the overtime implications if an otherwise-
exempt Specialist performs additional, non-exempt work on an hourly basis. 
A. Primary Duty Analysis 
As explained above, if an employee performs work in both exempt (e.g., Specialist) and non-
exempt (e.g., Staff Nurse) roles in the same workweek, the employee meets the duties requirements 
for an exemption if the employee’s primary duty remains the performance of exempt work as 
defined in Part 541. 
Based on the circumstances you describe, when an otherwise-exempt Specialist picks up one or 
occasionally two shifts per week in the Staff Nurse role, the employee’s primary duty remains the 
performance of qualifying exempt Specialist work.  In particular, the substantial majority of the 
employee’s time (i.e., approximately 40 hours per workweek) is spent in the Specialist role, a 
factor that generally satisfies the primary duty requirement.  29 C.F.R. § 541.700.  The fact that 
the Specialist only picks up one or two 12-hour Staff Nurse shifts per week on weekends as a 
supplement to his work as a Specialist lends further support to our conclusion that the Specialist 
role remains the primary duty.   
The main functions of the Specialist role, such as identifying gaps in learning opportunities, 
designing professional educational programs, and conducting ongoing competency processes, 
among others—as well as possessing and, more important, exercising the autonomy, flexibility, 
and discretion required to perform these functions—are also factors indicating that the Specialist 
would continue to satisfy the primary duty requirement.  This is so even though, while providing 
educational support to staff, the Specialist may perform some of the same tasks (e.g., patient 
interventions) as a Staff Nurse.  See 29 C.F.R. § 541.703 (recognizing that exempt work might 
include otherwise non-exempt activities when the employee is performing them because they are 
“directly and closely related” to the archetypal exempt work described throughout Part 541); cf. 
 
5 As we recently explained and noted above, the employer may—but is not required to—take or claim the 
exemption.  See supra note 1. 
6 Whether a nurse meets the duties test for the learned-professional exemption will generally depend at least 
in part on whether the nurse is of a type whose position requires a specialized advanced academic degree 
as a standard prerequisite for entry into the occupation.  See 29 C.F.R. § 541.301(e)(2). 
--- page 18 ---
 
 
5 
WHD Op. Ltr. FLSA2005-20 (Aug. 19, 2005) (“having some employees within the same job 
classification who perform the same duties[,] but who are paid on a different (hourly) basis, does 
not affect the status of any other exempt employees paid on a salary basis.”).  As a result, the 
employee would continue to satisfy the duties requirement for the exemption.7 
B. Salary Level and Basis Analysis 
Based on the information you provided, the Specialist’s base pay—approximately $2,000 per 
week—exceeds the minimum salary-level requirement set forth at 29 C.F.R. § 541.600.  In 
addition, we conclude that the Specialist’s base pay structure meets the salary-basis requirement 
set forth in 29 C.F.R. 541.602(a).  Section 541.602(a) provides an employee receives a “salary” if 
he is paid “a predetermined amount” “on a weekly[ ] or less frequent basis.” 29 C.F.R § 541.602(a).  
The regulation requires that “[w]henever an employee works at all in a week, he must get his full 
salary for that week.”  Helix Energy Sols. Grp. v. Hewitt, 598 U.S. 39, 51 (2023) (cleaned up); 29 
C.F.R § 541.602(a).  Here, for each week, the employee receives the full Specialist salary, 
regardless of hours worked, for all work performed during the week in the Specialist role.  Thus, 
based on the facts presented, the Specialist salary appears to satisfy 29 C.F.R. 541.602(a).  See 
Helix, 598 U.S. at 52 (explaining that § 541.602(a) requires “what people ordinarily think being 
‘salaried’ means”). 
In general, when an employer pays an employee on a salary basis under § 541.602(a), the employer 
may provide the employee with “additional compensation” without violating the salary-basis 
requirement, including “additional compensation based on hours worked for work beyond the 
normal workweek.”8  29 C.F.R. § 541.604(a) (emphasis added) (providing a non-exclusive listing 
of examples); see also WHD Op. Ltr. FLSA2020-2 (Jan. 7, 2020) (explaining that additional 
payments for work performed beyond the normal workweek, such as work beyond the original 
scope, can be made without changing the employee’s exempt status); WHD Op. Ltr. FLSA2005-
20 (Aug. 19, 2005) (explaining that an employer may pay exempt employees an overtime premium 
or shift differential pay on an hourly basis without invalidating their otherwise-exempt status).  
“Such additional compensation may be paid on any basis (e.g., flat sum, bonus payment, straight-
time hourly amount, time and one-half or any other basis).”  29 C.F.R. § 541.604(a).  Thus, the 
additional hourly compensation that a Specialist receives for work performed while picking up 
  
 
7 If, over time, all the work performed by an employee in both roles reflects a primary duty that, in fact, 
consists of activities that do not meet the duties requirements of Part 541, then the employer could not 
properly claim the exemption under section (a)(1) of the Act in any workweek.  See, e.g., WHD Op. Ltr. 
FLSA2005-29 (Aug. 26, 2005) (finding employees’ primary duty to be the performance of their full-time, 
non-exempt work where the employees only took on the exempt role on a part-time basis).  In that scenario, 
overtime would be computed based on the combined total remuneration and hours for both positions in 
accordance with 29 U.S.C. § 207 and 29 C.F.R. Part 778. 
8 We note that the FLSA does not require additional compensation beyond the predetermined salary based 
on the performance of additional or different work of any kind, whether voluntary or mandatory, by an 
employee exempt from overtime.  See, e.g., WHD Op. Ltr. FLSA2005-14 (Mar. 17, 2005). 
--- page 19 ---
 
 
6 
some hourly shifts as a Staff Nurse does not violate the salary basis requirement or defeat the 
exemption.9 
In conclusion, an employee in the circumstances you describe remains exempt from the Act’s 
minimum wage and overtime requirements even though the employee performs some non-exempt 
work and receives additional hourly compensation for such work.   
This letter is an official interpretation of the governing statutes and regulations by the 
Administrator of the Wage and Hour Division of the United States Department of Labor for 
purposes of the Portal-to-Portal Act.  See 29 U.S.C. § 259.  This interpretation may be relied upon 
in accordance with section 10 of the Portal-to-Portal Act, notwithstanding that after any such act 
or omission in the course of such reliance, the interpretation is “modified or rescinded or is 
determined by judicial authority to be invalid or of no legal effect.”  Id. 
We trust that this letter is responsive to your inquiry. 
Sincerely, 
 
Andrew B. Rogers 
Administrator 
 
*Note: The actual name(s) was removed to protect privacy in accordance with 5 U.S.C. 
§ 552(b)(6).  You represent that you do not seek this opinion for any party that the Wage and Hour 
Division (WHD) is currently investigating or for any litigation that commenced prior to your 
request.  This opinion is based exclusively on the facts and circumstances described in your request 
and is given based on your representation, express or implied, that you have provided a full and 
fair description of all the facts and circumstances that would be pertinent to our consideration of 
the question presented.  The existence of any other factual or historical background not contained 
in your letter might require a conclusion different from the one expressed herein. 
 
9 Merely because that the employer opts to derive the hourly rate for the Staff Nurse work from the 
Specialist’s salary—that satisfies § 541.602—for purposes of computing additional compensation—
consistent with § 541.604(a)—does not call the salary or the employee’s exempt status into question.  
Because there is no indication that a Specialist’s underlying compensation is based on an hourly, daily, or 
shift rate, there is no need to further assess the guaranteed salary.  See 29 C.F.R. § 541.604(b) (requiring a 
“reasonable relationship” between the guaranteed amount and the amount actually earned in a typical 
workweek where the employee’s usual earnings are computed on an hourly, daily or shift basis); Helix, 598 
U.S. at 46–47 (explaining applicability and requirements of § 541.604(b)) ; see also  WHD Op. Ltr. 
FLSA2018-25 (Nov. 8, 2018) (applying the reasonable-relationship requirement from § 541.604(b) where 
it was undisputed that the employer began with an hourly rate, set a guaranteed predetermined amount 
based on that hourly rate, and then also paid that hourly rate for all additional hours worked beyond that 
time); WHD Op. Ltr. 2020-2 (Jan. 7, 2020) (“As the employee’s underlying compensation is not computed 
on an hourly, daily, or shift basis, the reasonable relationship requirement does not apply”) (emphasis 
added). 

--- page 20 ---
U.S. Department of Labor Wage and Hour Division 
 Washington, DC  20210 
 
 
 
FLSA2026-7 
May 28, 2026 
Dear Name*: 
This letter responds to your request for an opinion concerning whether an employer must consider 
time an employee spends traveling off-site voluntarily for a meal when determining whether a 
meal period is compensable under the Fair Labor Standards Act (FLSA or Act). Specifically, you 
ask whether time spent traversing an employer’s premises and passing through a controlled access 
entry and exit is compensable under the Act when the employer allots employees a 30-minute meal 
period during which they are allowed to remain on the premises. 
Based on the information you provided, it is our opinion that the time set aside for the meal period 
is long enough to allow you to use it on-site for this purpose and is an uninterrupted period during 
which you are relieved from duty for the purpose of eating or engaging in personal activities.  An 
employee voluntarily forgoing this option to go off-site does not alter the analysis.  Accordingly, 
the meal period your employer provides is bona fide pursuant to 29 C.F.R. § 785.19. 
BACKGROUND 
You represent that you are employed at a “large, secured facility with controlled access points and 
parking located a significant distance from work areas.”  We surmise that the secured facility and 
parking are part of a larger corporate campus.  You state that your employer provides an unpaid 
30-minute meal period, during which you have the option to leave the premises, or remain at the 
work site, “in which case no time is lost to walking or access delays.”  Nevertheless, based on the 
information in your request, because it takes 5 to 10 minutes to walk from your job site to the 
parking lot, with additional time to pass through the facility’s security gates, and similar time is 
required upon your return, you state that some employees are left with only 10 to 15 minutes in 
their meal period.  You feel that this creates a “coercive dynamic” which discourages employees 
from taking meal breaks off-site. 
GENERAL LEGAL PRINCIPLES 
The FLSA generally requires covered employers to pay all non-exempt employees at least the 
federal minimum wage for all hours worked.  29 U.S.C. § 206.  In addition, the Act requires 
payment “at a rate not less than one and one-half times the regular rate at which [the employee] is 
employed” to all non-exempt employees for all hours worked in excess of 40 hours in a workweek.  
Id. § 207(a)(1).  The amount of wages an employee is entitled to receive cannot be determined 
without knowing the number of hours worked.  See 29 C.F.R. § 785.1. 
--- page 21 ---
 
2 
The Act generally does not require employers to provide employees rest breaks or meal periods.1  
If such breaks are provided, however, Wage and Hour Division (WHD or Division) regulations 
explain when such time is compensable.  The relevant regulation, first promulgated in 1955,2 
addresses the compensability of employees’ mealtimes.  It provides that “[b]ona fide meal periods 
are not worktime,” and that to be bona fide the employee must be relieved from duty for the 
purposes of eating regular meals.3  29 C.F.R. § 785.19(a).  Typically, “30 minutes or more is long 
enough for a bona fide meal period.”  Id.  “It is not necessary that an employee be permitted to 
leave the premises” if the employee is “freed from duties during the meal period.”  Id. § 785.19(b). 
The central issue in most meal break cases is whether the employees were required to “work” (as 
that term is used under the FLSA) during their meal period.  Put another way, we evaluate whether 
employees actually were relieved from their work duties and tasks.  Courts have generally adopted 
the “predominant benefit” test, under which time is compensable work time if it is predominantly 
for the employer’s benefit, and non-compensable if it is predominantly for the employee’s benefit.  
See, e.g., Reich v. S. New England Telecomms. Corp., 121 F.3d 58, 64 (2d Cir. 1997) (citing 
Skidmore v. Swift & Co., 323 U.S. 134, 136–37 (1944) and Armour & Co. v. Wantock, 323 U.S. 
126, 133 (1944)); Leahy v. City of Chicago, 96 F.3d 228, 230 n.2 (7th Cir. 1996).  This requires a 
fact-intensive analysis that must be applied on a case-by-case basis. 
The Act does not require absolute freedom for a break to be bona fide and non-compensable.  An 
employer may place certain limitations or conditions upon a bona fide meal period without having 
to compensate employees for such time, and courts have agreed that employees need not be 
permitted to leave the premises to receive a bona fide meal period.  For example, in Ruffin v. 
MotorCity Casino, 775 F.3d 807 (6th Cir. 2015), the Sixth Circuit ruled that meal breaks for casino 
security guards were not compensable under the FLSA because even though they were not 
permitted to leave the premises and were required to monitor their radios, they were otherwise free 
to eat and socialize.  See also Haviland v. Catholic Health Initiatives-Iowa, Corp., 729 F. Supp. 2d 
1038, 1062 (S.D. Iowa, 2010) (collecting cases showing that “substantial law supports a finding 
that merely requiring an employee to remain on the employer’s premises does not convert meal 
break time into compensable working time”).  These cases and others reinforce the Division’s 
longstanding position that requiring an employee to remain on the employer’s premises does not 
convert meal break time into compensable working time. 
Consistent with the foregoing, we have explained that employees who during their meal periods 
were “restricted to a small lunchroom and [could] not . . . leave the building[,]” in order to maintain 
security and avoid theft, nevertheless received a bona fide meal period and were not entitled to 
compensation.  See WHD Opinion Letter FLSA2004-7NA (Aug. 6, 2004).  Indeed, we confirmed 
that merely because “the employees are not allowed to leave the premises and are otherwise 
 
1 The Act requires employers to afford breaks in certain circumstances.  For example, most nursing 
employees have the right to reasonable break time to express breast milk while at work; this right is 
available for up to one year after the child’s birth.  See 29 U.S.C. § 218d; see also WHD Fact Sheet #73: 
FLSA Protections for Employees to Pump Breast Milk at Work. 
2 The regulation was first promulgated in 1955 in 29 C.F.R. § 785.3(d), see 20 Fed. Reg. 9963, 9965 (Dec. 
24, 1955), and subsequently moved to 29 C.F.R. § 785.19, see 26 Fed. Reg. 190, 192 (Jan. 11, 1961). 
3 Compensability of rest periods is addressed in 29 C.F.R. § 785.18. 
--- page 22 ---
 
3 
slightly restricted in their activities during the meal period” did not transform the time into 
compensable hours worked.  Id.  In concluding that the meal period at issue did “not constitute 
compensable worktime[,]” WHD focused on the fact that “the employees [were] completely 
relieved from their duties, . . . allowed to take their meals uninterrupted by the employer, and 
[were] provided sufficient time to eat their meal.”   
OPINION 
Based on the factual representations in your letter, the Division concludes that your employer 
provides a bona fide meal period consistent with 29 C.F.R. § 785.19 because you are relieved from 
your work duties during the 30-minute meal break, and the period is sufficient to allow you to use 
it for the purpose of eating a meal. 
Subsection 785.19(b) expressly provides that for a meal period to be bona fide, it “is not necessary 
that an employee be permitted to leave the premises” if the employee is “freed from duties during 
the meal period.”  Thus, while your letter indicates that you believe that 30 minutes is insufficient 
time for an off-site meal due to the physical characteristics of the employer’s facility (e.g., distance 
to the parking lot and waiting to pass through security, among other things), you nevertheless have 
the option to leave the employer’s premises during the meal period—which, as explained above, 
is not required by the Act.   
As a number of courts have ruled and WHD has previously explained, the fact that an employee 
is required to eat his or her meal on the employer’s premises or is minimally restricted in the 
activities they may perform does not convert this meal period into compensable time.  Moreover, 
because the employer may lawfully require employees to remain on the premises for the meal 
period, the fact that an off-site meal may be difficult to undertake in the time provided does not 
affect whether you receive a bona fide meal period.   
For the same reason, an employer is not obligated to exclude from a bona fide meal period, and to 
consider as compensable, time voluntarily spent to travel off-site to acquire or eat a meal or to 
otherwise extend the 30-minute meal period to accommodate time an employee may spend leaving 
and returning to his or her work area from off-site before and after the meal.4 
Determining whether a meal break is bona fide also requires consideration of whether “work” was 
performed by the employee during the meal period.  There is no indication in your request that 
your employer requires employees to work during a meal period when they are present at the 
worksite, and it appears that you are relieved from work responsibilities during that time.  As such, 
you have discretion to use your meal period “for the purpose[] of eating regular meals” or for other 
personal matters consistent with 29 C.F.R. § 785.19(a) and (b). 
This letter is an official interpretation of the governing statutes and regulations by the 
Administrator of the Wage and Hour Division of the United States Department of Labor for 
purposes of the Portal-to-Portal Act.  See 29 U.S.C. § 259.  This interpretation may be relied upon 
in accordance with section 10 of the Portal-to-Portal Act, “notwithstanding that after any such act 
 
4 It is also important to remember that applicable state and local wage and hour laws may have rules and 
requirements that are more stringent than the FLSA’s requirements. 
--- page 23 ---
 
4 
or omission” in the course of such reliance, the interpretation is “modified or rescinded or is 
determined by judicial authority to be invalid or of no legal effect.”  Id. 
We trust that this letter is responsive to your inquiry. 
Sincerely, 
 
Andrew B. Rogers 
Administrator 
*Note: The actual name(s) was removed to protect privacy in accordance with 5 U.S.C. 
§ 552(b)(6).  You represent that you do not seek this opinion for any party that the Wage and Hour 
Division (WHD) is currently investigating or for any litigation that commenced prior to your 
request.  This opinion is based exclusively on the facts and circumstances described in your request 
and is given based on your representation, express or implied, that you have provided a full and 
fair description of all the facts and circumstances that would be pertinent to our consideration of 
the question presented.  The existence of any other factual or historical background not contained 
in your letter might require a conclusion different from the one expressed herein. 

--- page 24 ---
U.S. Department of Labor Wage and Hour Division 
 Washington, DC  20210 
 
 
 
 FLSA 2025-05 
September 30, 2025 
Dear Name*: 
This letter is in response to your request for an opinion concerning the application of the overtime 
requirements of the Fair Labor Standards Act (FLSA) to your work at a restaurant and a members-
only club (“members club”), which operate on the first and second floors, respectively, of a hotel, 
and whose ownership, management, and operations, among other things, appear common. 
It is our opinion that, under the specific facts presented, you are jointly employed by the restaurant 
and members club . Accordingly, under the se facts, all the hours that you work at the restaurant 
and members club must be combined for purposes of calculating your  hours worked each 
workweek, and both the restaurant and members club are jointly and severally liable for all aspects 
of FLSA compliance. 
This opinion is based exclusively on the facts as presented below that you provided to the 
Department and may not apply to different facts in this or other situations. 
 
BACKGROUND 
You represent that you are employed as a hostess at a restaurant at the rate of $28.00 per hour and 
have been offered shifts at the members club at the same rate of pay . The restaurant is located 
inside of a hotel with the members club located on the second floor of the restaurant. The restaurant 
and members club share a kitchen, offer substantially the same food and beverages , and operate 
under similar trade names. You further state that other employees also perform work in both the 
restaurant and members club in the same workweek, such as other hostesses, the bar manager, the 
wine director, and members of the management teams of each facility . Similarly, you represent 
that you are  occasionally “clocked in” at the restaurant while assigned to work at the members  
club at the same hourly rate and that you have observed managers from the restaurant participate 
in disciplinary matters at the members club when you were working there. Although the restaurant 
and club are purported to have separate business structures and possibly use different timekeeping 
and payroll systems, you believe they have common ownership. 
Your request indicates that you generally work 5 dinner shifts  per workweek at the restaurant , 
which total 40 hours or less per workweek. You have been asked to “pick up” 4 lunch shifts at the 
members club, which will increase your total  hours worked in the workweek beyond 40 hours. 
When you asked whether you would rece ive overtime pay  for hours worked over  40 in a 
workweek, you state that you were told that you would not , on the basis that the restaurant and 
members club are different companies. 
GENERAL LEGAL PRINCIPLES 
The FLSA defines “employer,” “employee,” and “employ” at 29 U.S.C. § 203 (d), (e) and (g), 
respectively. An “employee” is “any individual employed by an employer,” an “employer ” 
--- page 25 ---
2 
includes “any person acting directly or indirectly in the interest of an employer in relation to an 
employee[,]” and the term “ employ” include s “to suffer or permit to work. ” 29 U.S.C. 
§§ 203(e)(1), 203(d), 203(g). The FLSA separately defines the term “person” to include “any 
organized group of persons,” which could include groups of “corporations.” 29 U.S.C. 203(a). 
Separately incorporated entities may be considered a single employer with respect to an employee, 
or employees, for purposes of compliance with the FLSA. Alternatively, even if two or more 
entities are considered separate employers , they can nonetheless be “joint employers” under the 
FLSA if they have related employment relationships with the same employee(s) . See, e.g., Chao 
v. A-One Medical Services, Inc. , 346 F.3d 908, 917–18 (9th Cir. 2003) . All joint employers are 
jointly and severally liable for FLSA compliance, including any wages, damages, and penalties 
owed to the employee(s). See, e.g., Schultz v. Capital Int’l Sec., Inc., 466 F.3d 298, 310 (4th Cir. 
2006). 
When one employer employs a worker for one set of hours in a workweek, and another employer 
employs the same worker for a separate set of hours in the same workweek, that scenario may be, 
under appropriate circumstances, “horizontal” joint employment . Horizontal joint employment  
typically occurs when employers are sufficiently associated with respect to the employment of the 
particular employee(s). See generally Chao, 435 F.3d at 918 (citing 29 CFR 791.2(a) (2003)). As 
relevant here, this can occur where, among other situations, “there is an arrangement between the 
employers to share an employee’s services, as, for example, to interchange employees.” Id. at 917 
(quoting 29 CFR 791.2(b) (2003)). 
If horizontal joint employment exists , the employee’s total hours worked each workweek for all 
joint employers must be used (1) to confirm that the employee has received the FLSA minimum 
wage and (2) to determine the employee’s entitlement to overtime pay —both with respect to 
whether or to what extent overtime hours have been worked and the total remuneration and total 
hours worked for purposes of calculating the regular rate and resulting overtime premium due. See, 
e.g., Chao, 346 F.3d at 918 (aggregating hours from joint employers for the purpose of determining 
overtime); Wirtz v. Hebert , 368 F.2d 139, 141–42 (5th Cir. 1966) (same). Thus, an employee’s 
hours worked for all the employee’s joint employers must be a dded together to determine the 
employee’s total hours for the workweek, and each of the employers is jointly and severally liable 
for any wages owed under the FLSA . For example, two separate retail establishments might 
coordinate with each other over the pay or work schedule of the same cashier such that they are 
joint employers . In this scenario, if the c ashier worked 30 hours per work week for each 
establishment, the cashier would be entitled to 20 hours of overtime premium pay (60 total hours 
minus 40), which the cashier could collect from either employer. 
OPINION 
Based on your representation of the facts, we agree that your hours worked for both the restaurant 
and the members  club, because they are joint employers, must be combined to determine your 
hours worked during each workweek, and that you are entitled to overtime pay if your combined 
hours exceed 40 in a single workweek. 
As explained above , w hile the restaurant and members club may be separate legal entities, 
corporate formalities  do not necessarily override the FLSA’s application. T he facts you have 
--- page 26 ---
3 
provided are sufficient to demonstrate  a horizontal joint -employer relationship under the FLSA, 
as the restaurant and members club are sufficiently associated with each other with respect to your 
employment. 
For example, the two facilities appear to be operational ly integrated with each other , including 
their physical proximity, their common kitchen, and their similar food and beverage menus. While 
the restaurant and members  club may have separate management teams, some  managers 
periodically supervise and manage both, and the facilities apparently have the same owners . See 
WHD Opinion Letter FLSA2005- 17NA (June 14, 2005) (noting that potentially relevant factors 
to prove the sufficient association of joint employers include “whether there are common officers 
or directors of the companies ” and “the nature of the common management support provided”) . 
That you can be “clocked in” at the restaurant and then directed to work in the members  club 
likewise indicates sufficient association, as do your identical rates of pay at each facility  and the 
fact that the additional shifts being offered at the members  club do not conflict with your current 
restaurant schedule, which suggests that they coordinate when scheduling you. All these factors 
are indicia that the two operations are at minimum joint employers under the FLSA. 
Accordingly, the Department  believes that all of the hours that you work each workweek at the 
restaurant and the members club must be combined for the purposes of FLSA compliance, and that 
you should be paid the overtime premium in accordance with the FLSA for hours worked over 40 
in a workweek. 
We trust that this letter is responsive to your inquiry. 
Sincerely, 
 
 
 
James R. Macy 
Acting Administrator 
 
*Note: The actual name(s) was removed to protect privacy in accordance with 5 U.S.C. 
§ 552(b)(6). You represent that you do not seek this opinion for any party that the Wage and Hour 
Division (WHD) is currently investigating or for any litigation that commenced prior to your  
request. This opinion is based exclusively on the facts and circumstances described in your request 
and is given based on your representation, express or implied, that you have provided a full and 
fair description of all the facts and circumst ances that would be pertinent to our consideration of 
the question presented. The existence of any other factual or historical background not contained 
in your letter might require a conclusion different from the one expressed herein. This is an official 
ruling for purposes of the Portal-to-Portal Act, 29 U.S.C. § 259. 
