
42 CFR Part 405 Subpart I - Determinations, Redeterminations, Reconsiderations, and Appeals
===========================================================================================


§ 405.904 Medicare initial determinations, redeterminations and appeals: General description.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------

(a) General overview—(1) Entitlement appeals. The SSA makes an initial determination on an
application for Medicare benefits and/or entitlement of an individual to receive Medicare
benefits. A beneficiary who is dissatisfied with the initial determination may request, and
SSA will perform, a reconsideration in accordance with 20 CFR part 404, subpart J if the
requirements for obtaining a reconsideration are met. Following the reconsideration, the
beneficiary may request a hearing before an ALJ under this subpart (42 CFR part 405, subpart
I). If the beneficiary obtains a hearing before an ALJ and is dissatisfied with the decision
of the ALJ, or if the beneficiary requests a hearing and no hearing is conducted, and the
beneficiary is dissatisfied with the decision of an ALJ or an attorney adjudicator, he or
she may request the Council to review the case. Following the action of the Council, the
beneficiary may be entitled to file suit in Federal district court.

(2) Claim appeals. The Medicare contractor makes an initial determination when a claim for
Medicare benefits under Part A or Part B is submitted. A beneficiary who is dissatisfied
with the initial determination may request that the contractor perform a redetermination of
the claim if the requirements for obtaining a redetermination are met. Following the
contractor's redetermination, the beneficiary may request, and the Qualified Independent
Contractor (QIC) will perform, a reconsideration of the claim if the requirements for
obtaining a reconsideration are met. Following the reconsideration, the beneficiary may
request a hearing before an ALJ. If the beneficiary obtains a hearing before the ALJ and is
dissatisfied with the decision of the ALJ, or if the beneficiary requests a hearing and no
hearing is conducted, and the beneficiary is dissatisfied with the decision of an ALJ or
attorney adjudicator, he or she may request the Council to review the case. If the Council
reviews the case and issues a decision, and the beneficiary is dissatisfied with the
decision, the beneficiary may file suit in Federal district court if the amount remaining in
controversy and the other requirements for judicial review are met.

(b) Non-beneficiary appellants. In general, the procedures described in paragraph (a) of
this section are also available to parties other than beneficiaries either directly or
through a representative acting on a party's behalf, consistent with the requirements of
this subpart I. A provider generally has the right to judicial review only as provided under
section 1879(d) of the Act; that is, when a determination involves a finding that services
are not covered because—

(1) They were custodial care (see § 411.15(g) of this chapter); they were not reasonable and
necessary (see § 411.15(k) of this chapter); they did not qualify as covered home health
services because the beneficiary was not confined to the home or did not need skilled
nursing care on an intermittent basis (see § 409.42(a) and (c)(1) of this chapter); or they
were hospice services provided to a non-terminally ill individual (see § 418.22 of this
chapter); and

(2) Either the provider or the beneficiary, or both, knew or could reasonably be expected to
know that those services were not covered under Medicare.


----------------------------------------------------------------------


§ 405.921 Notice of initial determination.
------------------------------------------

(a) Notice of initial determination sent to the beneficiary. (1) The notice must be written
in a manner calculated to be understood by the beneficiary, and sent to the last known
address of the beneficiary.

(2) Content of the notice. The notice of initial determination must contain all of the
following:

(i) The reasons for the determination, including whether a local medical review policy, a
local coverage determination, or national coverage determination was applied.

(ii) The procedures for obtaining additional information concerning the contractor's
determination, such as a specific provision of the policy, manual, law or regulation used in
making the determination.

(iii) Information on the right to a redetermination if the beneficiary is dissatisfied with
the outcome of the initial determination and instructions on how to request a
redetermination.

(iv) Any other requirements specified by CMS.

(b) Notice of initial determination sent to providers and suppliers. (1) An electronic or
paper remittance advice (RA) notice is the notice of initial determination sent to providers
and suppliers that accept assignment.

(i) The electronic RA must comply with the format and content requirements of the standard
adopted for national use by covered entities under the Health Insurance Portability and
Accountability Act (HIPAA) and related CMS manual instructions.

(ii) When a paper RA is mailed, it must comply with CMS manual instructions that parallel
the HIPAA data content and coding requirements.

(2) The notice of initial determination must contain all of the following:

(i) The basis for any full or partial denial determination of services or items on the
claim.

(ii) Information on the right to a redetermination if the provider or supplier is
dissatisfied with the outcome of the initial determination.

(iii) All applicable claim adjustment reason and remark codes to explain the determination.

(iv) The source of the RA and who may be contacted if the provider or supplier requires
further information.

(v) All content requirements of the standard adopted for national use by covered entities
under HIPAA.

(vi) Any other requirements specified by CMS.

(c) Notice of initial determination sent to an applicable plan—(1) Content of the notice.
The notice of initial determination under § 405.924(b)(16) must contain all of the
following:

(i) The reasons for the determination.

(ii) The procedures for obtaining additional information concerning the contractor's
determination, such as a specific provision of the policy, manual, law or regulation used in
making the determination.

(iii) Information on the right to a redetermination if the liability insurance (including
self-insurance), no-fault insurance, or workers' compensation law or plan is dissatisfied
with the outcome of the initial determination and instructions on how to request a
redetermination.

(iv) Any other requirements specified by CMS.

(2) [Reserved]


----------------------------------------------------------------------


§ 405.924 Actions that are initial determinations.
--------------------------------------------------

(a) Applications and entitlement of individuals. SSA makes initial determinations and
processes reconsiderations with respect to an individual on the following:

(1) A determination with respect to entitlement to hospital insurance or supplementary
medical insurance under Medicare.

(2) A disallowance of an individual's application for entitlement to hospital or
supplementary medical insurance, if the individual fails to submit evidence requested by SSA
to support the application. (SSA specifies in the initial determination the conditions of
entitlement that the applicant failed to establish by not submitting the requested
evidence).

(3) A denial of a request for withdrawal of an application for hospital or supplementary
medical insurance, or a denial of a request for cancellation of a request for withdrawal.

(4) A determination as to whether an individual, previously determined as entitled to
hospital or supplementary medical insurance, is no longer entitled to those benefits,
including a determination based on nonpayment of premiums.

(5) An adjustment of premium for hospital or supplementary medical insurance as outlined in
§§ 406.32(d), 408.20(e), and 408.22 of this chapter, and 20 CFR 418.1301.

(b) Claims made by or on behalf of beneficiaries. The Medicare contractor makes initial
determinations regarding claims for benefits under Medicare Part A and Part B. A finding
that a request for payment or other submission does not meet the requirements for a Medicare
claim as defined in § 424.32 of this chapter, is not considered an initial determination. An
initial determination for purposes of this subpart includes, but is not limited to,
determinations with respect to any of the following:

(1) If the items and/or services furnished are covered under title XVIII.

(2) In the case of determinations on the basis of section 1879(b) or (c) of the Act, if the
beneficiary, or supplier who accepts assignment under § 424.55 of this chapter knew, or
could reasonably have expected to know at the time the items or services were furnished,
that the items or services were not covered.

(3) In the case of determinations on the basis of section 1842(l)(1) of the Act, if the
beneficiary or physician knew, or could reasonably have expected to know at the time the
services were furnished, that the services were not covered.

(4) Whether the deductible is met.

(5) The computation of the coinsurance amount.

(6) The number of days used for inpatient hospital, psychiatric hospital, or post-hospital
extended care.

(7) Periods of hospice care used.

(8) Requirements for certification and plan of treatment for physician services, durable
medical equipment, therapies, inpatient hospitalization, skilled nursing care, home health,
hospice, and partial hospitalization services.

(9) The beginning and ending of a spell of illness, including a determination made under the
presumptions established under § 409.60(c)(2) of this chapter, and as specified in §
409.60(c)(4) of this chapter.

(10) The medical necessity of services, or the reasonableness or appropriateness of
placement of an individual at an acute level of patient care made by the Quality Improvement
Organization (QIO) on behalf of the contractor in accordance with § 476.86(c)(1) of this
chapter.

(11) Any other issues having a present or potential effect on the amount of benefits to be
paid under Part A or Part B of Medicare, including a determination as to whether there was
an underpayment of benefits paid under Part A or Part B, and if so, the amount thereof.

(12) If a waiver of adjustment or recovery under sections 1870(b) and (c) of the Act is
appropriate—

(i) When an overpayment of hospital insurance benefits or supplementary medical insurance
benefits (including a payment under section 1814(e) of the Act) was made for an individual;
or

(ii) For a Medicare Secondary Payer recovery claim against a beneficiary or against a
provider or supplier.

(13) If a particular claim is not payable by Medicare based upon the application of the
Medicare Secondary Payer provisions of section 1862(b) of the Act.

(14) Under the Medicare Secondary Payer provisions of sections 1862(b) of the Act that
Medicare has a recovery claim against a provider, supplier, or beneficiary for services or
items that were already paid by the Medicare program, except when the Medicare Secondary
Payer recovery claim against the provider or supplier is based upon failure to file a proper
claim as defined in part 411 of this chapter because this action is a reopening.

(15) A claim not payable to a beneficiary for the services of a physician who has opted-out.

(16) Under the Medicare Secondary Payer provisions of section 1862(b) of the Act that
Medicare has a recovery claim if Medicare is pursuing recovery directly from an applicable
plan. That is, there is an initial determination with respect to the amount and existence of
the recovery claim.

(c) Determinations by QIOs. An initial determination for purposes of this subpart also
includes a determination made by a QIO that:

(1) A provider can terminate services provided to an individual when a physician certified
that failure to continue the provision of those services is likely to place the individual's
health at significant risk; or

(2) A provider can discharge an individual from the provider of services.


----------------------------------------------------------------------


§ 405.926 Actions that are not initial determinations.
------------------------------------------------------

Actions that are not initial determinations and are not appealable under this subpart
include, but are not limited to the following:

(a) Any determination for which CMS has sole responsibility, for example one of the
following:

(1) If an entity meets the conditions for participation in the program.

(2) If an independent laboratory meets the conditions for coverage of services.

(3) Determination under the Medicare Secondary Payer provisions of section 1862(b) of the
Act of the debtor for a particular recovery claim.

(b) The coinsurance amounts prescribed by regulation for outpatient services under the
prospective payment system.

(c) Any issue regarding the computation of the payment amount of program reimbursement of
general applicability for which CMS or a carrier has sole responsibility under Part B such
as the establishment of a fee schedule set forth in part 414 of this chapter, or an inherent
reasonableness adjustment pursuant to § 405.502(g), and any issue regarding the cost report
settlement process under Part A.

(d) Whether an individual's appeal meets the qualifications for expedited access to judicial
review provided in § 405.990.

(e) Any determination regarding whether a Medicare overpayment claim must be compromised, or
collection action terminated or suspended under the Federal Claims Collection Act of 1966,
as amended.

(f) Determinations regarding the transfer or discharge of residents of skilled nursing
facilities in accordance with § 483.5 definition of `transfer and discharge' and § 483.15 of
this chapter.

(g) Determinations regarding the readmission screening and annual resident review processes
required by subparts C and E of part 483 of this chapter.

(h) Determinations for a waiver of Medicare Secondary Payer recovery under section 1862(b)
of the Act.

(i) Determinations for a waiver of interest.

(j) Determinations for a finding regarding the general applicability of the Medicare
Secondary Payer provisions (as opposed to the application of these provisions to a
particular claim or claims for Medicare payment for benefits).

(k) Except as specified in § 405.924(b)(16), determinations under the Medicare Secondary
Payer provisions of section 1862(b) of the Act that Medicare has a recovery against an
entity that was or is required or responsible (directly, as an insurer or self-insurer; as a
third party administrator; as an employer that sponsors, contributes to or facilitates a
group health plan or a large group health plan; or otherwise) to make payment for services
or items that were already reimbursed by the Medicare program.

(l) A contractor's, QIC's, ALJ's or attorney adjudicator's, or Council's determination or
decision to reopen or not to reopen an initial determination, redetermination,
reconsideration, decision, or review decision.

(m) Determinations that CMS or its contractors may participate in the proceedings on a
request for an ALJ hearing or act as parties in an ALJ hearing or Council review.

(n) Determinations that a provider or supplier failed to submit a claim timely or failed to
submit a timely claim despite being requested to do so by the beneficiary or the
beneficiary's subrogee.

(o) Determinations with respect to whether an entity qualifies for an exception to the
electronic claims submission requirement under part 424 of this chapter.

(p) Determinations by the Secretary of sustained or high levels of payment errors in
accordance with section 1893(f)(3)(A) of the Act.

(q) A contractor's prior determination related to coverage of physicians' services.

(r) Requests for anticipated payment under the home health prospective payment system under
§ 409.43(c)(ii)(2) of this chapter.

(s) Claim submissions on forms or formats that are incomplete, invalid, or do not meet the
requirements for a Medicare claim and returned or rejected to the provider or supplier.

(t) A contractor's prior authorization determination with regard to—

(1) Durable medical equipment, prosthetics, orthotics, and supplies (DMEPOS)); and

(2) Hospital outpatient department (OPD) services.

(u) Issuance of notice to an individual entitled to Medicare benefits under Title XVIII of
the Act when such individual received observation services as an outpatient for more than 24
hours, as specified under § 489.20(y) of this chapter.


----------------------------------------------------------------------


§ 405.940 Right to a redetermination.
-------------------------------------

A person or entity that may be a party to a redetermination in accordance with § 405.906(b)
and that is dissatisfied with an initial determination may request a redetermination by a
contractor in accordance with § 405.940 through § 405.958, regardless of the amount in
controversy.


----------------------------------------------------------------------


§ 405.942 Time frame for filing a request for a redetermination.
----------------------------------------------------------------

(a) Time frame for filing a request. Except as provided in paragraph (b) of this section,
any request for redetermination must be filed within 120 calendar days from the date a party
receives the notice of the initial determination.

(1) For purposes of this section, the date of receipt of the initial determination will be
presumed to be 5 calendar days after the date of the notice of initial determination, unless
there is evidence to the contrary.

(2) The request is considered as filed on the date it is received by the contractor.

(b) Extending the time frame for filing a request. General rule. If the 120 calendar day
period in which to file a request for a redetermination has expired and a party shows good
cause, the contractor may extend the time frame for filing a request for redetermination.

(1) How to request an extension. A party may file a request for an extension of time for
filing a request for a redetermination with the contractor. The party should include any
evidence supporting the request for extension. The request for redetermination extension
must—

(i) Be in writing;

(ii) State why the request for redetermination was not filed within the required time frame;
and

(iii) Meet the requirements of § 405.944.

(2) How the contractor determines if good cause exists. In determining if a party has good
cause for missing a deadline to request a redetermination, the contractor considers—

(i) The circumstances that kept the party from making the request on time;

(ii) If the contractor's action(s) misled the party; and

(iii) If the party had or has any physical, mental, educational, or linguistic limitations,
including any lack of facility with the English language, that prevented the party from
filing a timely request or from understanding or knowing about the need to file a timely
request.

(3) Examples of good cause. Examples of circumstances when good cause may be found to exist
include, but are not limited to, the following situations:

(i) The party was prevented by serious illness from contacting the contractor in person, in
writing, or through a friend, relative, or other person; or

(ii) The party had a death or serious illness in his or her immediate family; or

(iii) Important records of the party were destroyed or damaged by fire or other accidental
cause; or

(iv) The contractor gave the party incorrect or incomplete information about when and how to
request a redetermination; or

(v) The party did not receive notice of the determination or decision; or

(vi) The party sent the request to a Government agency in good faith within the time limit,
and the request did not reach the appropriate contractor until after the time period to file
a request expired.


----------------------------------------------------------------------


§ 405.946 Evidence to be submitted with the redetermination request.
--------------------------------------------------------------------

(a) Evidence submitted with the request. When filing the request for redetermination, a
party must explain why it disagrees with the contractor's determination and should include
any evidence that the party believes should be considered by the contractor in making its
redetermination.

(b) Evidence submitted after the request. When a party submits additional evidence after
filing the request for redetermination, the contractor's 60 calendar day decision-making
time frame is automatically extended for up to 14 calendar days for each submission.


----------------------------------------------------------------------


§ 405.948 Conduct of a redetermination.
---------------------------------------

A redetermination consists of an independent review of an initial determination. In
conducting a redetermination, the contractor reviews the evidence and findings upon which
the initial determination was based, and any additional evidence the parties submit or the
contractor obtains on its own. An individual who was not involved in making the initial
determination must make a redetermination. The contractor may raise and develop new issues
that are relevant to the claims in the particular case.


----------------------------------------------------------------------


§ 405.960 Right to a reconsideration.
-------------------------------------

A person or entity that is a party to a redetermination made by a contractor as described
under § 405.940 through § 405.958, and is dissatisfied with that determination, may request
a reconsideration by a QIC in accordance with § 405.962 through § 405.966, regardless of the
amount in controversy.


----------------------------------------------------------------------


§ 405.962 Timeframe for filing a request for a reconsideration.
---------------------------------------------------------------

(a) Timeframe for filing a request. Except as provided in paragraph (b) of this section and
in § 405.974(b)(1), regarding a request for QIC reconsideration of a contractor's dismissal
of a redetermination request, any request for a reconsideration must be filed within 180
calendar days from the date the party receives the notice of the redetermination.

(1) For purposes of this section, the date of receipt of the redetermination will be
presumed to be 5 calendar days after the date of the notice of redetermination, unless there
is evidence to the contrary.

(2) For purposes of meeting the 180 calendar day filing deadline, the request is considered
as filed on the date it is received by the QIC.

(b) Extending the time for filing a request—(1) General rule. A QIC may extend the 180
calendar day timeframe for filing a request for reconsideration for good cause.

(2) How to request an extension. A party to the redetermination must file its request for an
extension of the time for filing the reconsideration request with its request for
reconsideration. A party should include evidence to support the request for extension. The
request for reconsideration and request for extension must—

(i) Be in writing;

(ii) State why the request for reconsideration was not filed within the required timeframe;
and

(iii) Meet the requirements of § 405.964.

(3) How the QIC determines whether good cause exists. In determining whether a party has
good cause for missing a deadline to request reconsideration, the QIC applies the good cause
provisions contained in § 405.942(b)(2) and (b)(3).


----------------------------------------------------------------------


§ 405.966 Evidence to be submitted with the reconsideration request.
--------------------------------------------------------------------

(a) Evidence submitted with the request. When filing a request for reconsideration, a party
should present evidence and allegations of fact or law related to the issue in dispute and
explain why it disagrees with the initial determination, including the redetermination.

(1) This evidence must include any missing documentation identified in the notice of
redetermination, consistent with § 405.956(b)(6).

(2) Absent good cause, failure to submit all evidence, including documentation requested in
the notice of redetermination prior to the issuance of the notice of reconsideration
precludes subsequent consideration of that evidence.

(b) Evidence submitted after the request. Each time a party submits additional evidence
after filing the request for reconsideration, the QIC's 60 calendar day decisionmaking
timeframe is automatically extended by up to 14 calendar days for each submission. This
extension does not apply to timely submissions of documentation specifically requested by a
QIC, unless the documentation was originally requested in the notice of redetermination.

(c) Exception for beneficiaries and State Medicaid Agencies that file reconsideration
requests. (1) Beneficiaries and State Medicaid Agencies that file requests for
reconsideration are not required to comply with the requirements of paragraph (a) of this
section. However, the automatic 14 calendar day extension described in paragraph (b) of this
section applies to each evidence submission made after the request for reconsideration is
filed.

(2) Beneficiaries who are represented by providers or suppliers must comply with the
requirements of paragraph (a) of this section.


----------------------------------------------------------------------


§ 405.968 Conduct of a reconsideration.
---------------------------------------

(a) General rules. (1) A reconsideration consists of an independent, on-the-record review of
an initial determination, including the redetermination and all issues related to payment of
the claim. In conducting a reconsideration, the QIC reviews the evidence and findings upon
which the initial determination, including the redetermination, was based, and any
additional evidence the parties submit or that the QIC obtains on its own. If the initial
determination involves a finding on whether an item or service is reasonable and necessary
for the diagnosis or treatment of illness or injury (under section 1862(a)(1)(A) of the
Act), a QIC's reconsideration must involve consideration by a panel of physicians or other
appropriate health care professionals, and be based on clinical experience, the patient's
medical records, and medical, technical, and scientific evidence of record to the extent
applicable.

(b) Authority of the QIC. (1) National coverage determinations (NCDs), CMS Rulings, Council
decisions designated by the Chair of the Departmental Appeals Board as having precedential
effect under § 401.109 of this chapter, and applicable laws and regulations are binding on
the QIC.

(2) QICs are not bound by LCDs, LMRPs, or CMS program guidance, such as program memoranda
and manual instructions, but give substantial deference to these policies if they are
applicable to a particular case. A QIC may decline to follow a policy, if the QIC
determines, either at a party's request or at its own discretion, that the policy does not
apply to the facts of the particular case.

(3) If a QIC declines to follow a policy in a particular case, the QIC's reconsideration
explains the reasons why the policy was not followed.

(4) A QIC's decision to decline to follow a policy under this section applies only to the
specific claim being reconsidered and does not have precedential effect.

(5) A QIC may raise and develop new issues that are relevant to the claims in a particular
case provided that the contractor rendered a redetermination with respect to the claims.

(c) Qualifications of the QIC's panel members. (1) Members of a QIC's panel who conduct
reconsiderations must have sufficient medical, legal, and other expertise, including
knowledge of the Medicare program.

(2) When a redetermination is made with respect to whether an item or service is reasonable
and necessary (section 1862(a)(1)(A) of the Act), the QIC designates a panel of physicians
or other appropriate health care professionals to consider the facts and circumstances of
the redetermination.

(3) Where a claim pertains to the furnishing of treatment by a physician, or the provision
of items or services by a physician, a reviewing professional must be a physician.

(d) Disqualification of a QIC panel member. No physician or health care professional
employed by or otherwise working for a QIC may review determinations regarding—

(1) Health care services furnished to a patient if that physician or health care
professional was directly responsible for furnishing those services; or

(2) Health care services provided in or by an institution, organization, or agency, if that
physician or health care professional or any member of the physician's family or health care
professional's family has, directly or indirectly, a significant financial interest in that
institution, organization, or agency (see the term family member as defined in § 405.902).


----------------------------------------------------------------------


§ 405.970 Timeframe for making a reconsideration following a contractor redetermination.
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------

(a) General rule. Within 60 calendar days of the date the QIC receives a timely filed
request for reconsideration following a contractor redetermination or any additional time
provided by paragraph (b) of this section, the QIC mails, or otherwise transmits to the
parties at their last known addresses, written notice of—

(1) The reconsideration;

(2) Its inability to complete its review within 60 calendar days in accordance with
paragraphs (c) through (e) of this section; or

(3) Dismissal.

(b) Exceptions. (1) If a QIC grants an appellant's request for an extension of the 180
calendar day filing deadline made in accordance with § 405.962(b), the QIC's 60 calendar day
decision-making timeframe begins on the date the QIC receives the late filed request for
reconsideration following a contractor redetermination, or when the request for an extension
that meets the requirements of § 405.962(b) is granted, whichever is later.

(2) If a QIC receives timely requests for reconsideration following a contractor
redetermination from multiple parties, consistent with § 405.964(c), the QIC must issue a
reconsideration, notice that it cannot complete its review, or dismissal within 60 calendar
days for each submission of the latest filed request.

(3) Each time a party submits additional evidence after the request for reconsideration
following a contractor redetermination is filed, the QIC's 60 calendar day decisionmaking
timeframe is extended by up to 14 calendar days for each submission, consistent with §
405.966(b).

(c) Responsibilities of the QIC. Within 60 calendar days of receiving a request for a
reconsideration following a contractor redetermination, or any additional time provided for
under paragraph (b) of this section, a QIC must take one of the following actions:

(1) Notify all parties of its reconsideration, consistent with § 405.976.

(2) Notify the parties that it cannot complete the reconsideration by the deadline specified
in paragraph (b) of this section and offer the appellant the opportunity to escalate the
appeal to OMHA. The QIC continues to process the reconsideration unless it receives a
written request from the appellant to escalate the case to OMHA after the adjudication
period has expired.

(d) Responsibilities of the appellant. If an appellant wishes to exercise the option of
escalating the case to OMHA, the appellant must notify the QIC in writing.

(e) Actions following appellant's notice. (1) If the appellant fails to notify the QIC, or
notifies the QIC that the appellant does not choose to escalate the case, the QIC completes
its reconsideration following a contractor redetermination and notifies the appellant of its
action consistent with § 405.972 or § 405.976.

(2) If the appellant notifies the QIC that the appellant wishes to escalate the case, the
QIC must take one of the following actions within 5 calendar days of receipt of the notice
or 5 calendar days from the end of the applicable adjudication period under paragraph (a) or
(b) of this section:

(i) Complete its reconsideration following a contractor redetermination and notify all
parties of its decision consistent with § 405.972 or § 405.976.

(ii) Acknowledge the escalation notice in writing and forward the case file to OMHA.


----------------------------------------------------------------------


§ 405.1002 Right to an ALJ hearing.
-----------------------------------

(a) A party to a QIC reconsideration has a right to a hearing before an ALJ if—

(1) The party files a written request for an ALJ hearing within 60 calendar days after
receipt of the notice of the QIC's reconsideration.

(2) The party meets the amount in controversy requirements of § 405.1006.

(3) For purposes of this section, the date of receipt of the reconsideration is presumed to
be 5 calendar days after the date of the reconsideration, unless there is evidence to the
contrary.

(4) For purposes of meeting the 60 calendar day filing deadline, the request is considered
as filed on the date it is received by the office specified in the QIC's reconsideration.

(b) A party who files a timely appeal before a QIC and whose appeal continues to be pending
before a QIC at the end of the period described in § 405.970 has a right to a hearing before
an ALJ if—

(1) The party files a written request with the QIC to escalate the appeal for a hearing
before an ALJ after the period described in § 405.970(a) and (b) has expired and the party
files the request in accordance with § 405.970(d);

(2) The QIC does not issue a decision or dismissal order within 5 calendar days of receiving
the request for escalation in accordance with § 405.970(e)(2); and

(3) The party has an amount remaining in controversy specified in § 405.1006.


----------------------------------------------------------------------


§ 405.1006 Amount in controversy required for an ALJ hearing and judicial review.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------------

(a) Definitions. For the purposes of aggregating claims to meet the amount in controversy
requirement for an ALJ hearing or judicial review:

(1) “Common issues of law and fact” means the claims sought to be aggregated are denied, or
payment is reduced, for similar reasons and arise from a similar fact pattern material to
the reason the claims are denied or payment is reduced.

(2) “Delivery of similar or related services” means like or coordinated services or items
provided to one or more beneficiaries.

(b) ALJ review. To be entitled to a hearing before an ALJ, the party must meet the amount in
controversy requirements of this section.

(1) For ALJ hearing requests, the required amount remaining in controversy must be $100
increased by the percentage increase in the medical care component of the consumer price
index for all urban consumers (U.S. city average) as measured from July 2003 to the July
preceding the current year involved.

(2) If the figure in paragraph (b)(1) of this section is not a multiple of $10, then it is
rounded to the nearest multiple of $10. The Secretary will publish changes to the amount in
controversy requirement in the Federal Register when necessary.

(c) Judicial review. To be entitled to judicial review, a party must meet the amount in
controversy requirements of this subpart at the time it requests judicial review.

(1) For review requests, the required amount remaining in controversy must be $1,000 or
more, adjusted as specified in paragraphs (b)(1) and (b)(2) of this section.

(2) [Reserved]

(d) Calculating the amount remaining in controversy—(1) In general. The amount remaining in
controversy is computed as the actual amount charged the individual for the items and
services in the disputed claim, reduced by—

(i) Any Medicare payments already made or awarded for the items or services; and

(ii) Any deductible and/or coinsurance amounts that may be collected for the items or
services.

(2) Limitation on liability. Notwithstanding paragraph (d)(1) of this section, when payment
is made for items or services under section 1879 of the Act or § 411.400 of this chapter, or
the liability of the beneficiary for those services is limited under § 411.402 of this
chapter, the amount in controversy is computed as the amount the beneficiary would have been
charged for the items or services in question if those expenses were not paid under §
411.400 of this chapter or if that liability was not limited under § 411.402 of this
chapter, reduced by any deductible and/or coinsurance amounts that may be collected for the
items or services.

(3) Item or service terminations. When a matter involves a provider or supplier termination
of Medicare-covered items or services that is disputed by a beneficiary, and the beneficiary
did not elect to continue receiving the items or services, the amount in controversy is
calculated in accordance with paragraph (d)(1) of this section, except that the amount
charged to the individual and any deductible and coinsurance that may be collected for the
items or services are calculated using the amount the beneficiary would have been charged if
the beneficiary had received the items or services the beneficiary asserts should have been
covered based on the beneficiary's current condition, and Medicare payment were not made for
the items or services.

(4) Overpayments. Notwithstanding paragraph (d)(1) of this section, when an appeal involves
an identified overpayment, the amount in controversy is the amount of the overpayment
specified in the demand letter, or the amount of the revised overpayment if the amount
originally demanded changes as a result of a subsequent determination or appeal, for the
items or services in the disputed claim. When an appeal involves an estimated overpayment
amount determined through the use of statistical sampling and extrapolation, the amount in
controversy is the total amount of the estimated overpayment determined through
extrapolation, as specified in the demand letter, or as subsequently revised.

(5) Coinsurance and deductible challenges. Notwithstanding paragraph (d)(1) of this section,
for appeals filed by beneficiaries challenging only the computation of a coinsurance amount
or the amount of a remaining deductible, the amount in controversy is the difference between
the amount of the coinsurance or remaining deductible, as determined by the contractor, and
the amount of the coinsurance or remaining deductible the beneficiary believes is correct.

(6) Fee schedule or contractor price challenges. Notwithstanding paragraph (d)(1) of this
section, for appeals of claims where the allowable amount has been paid in full and the
appellant is challenging only the validity of the allowable amount, as reflected on the
published fee schedule or in the published contractor-priced amount applicable to the items
or services in the disputed claim, the amount in controversy is the difference between the
amount the appellant argues should have been the allowable amount for the items or services
in the disputed claim in the applicable jurisdiction and place of service, and the published
allowable amount for the items or services.

(e) Aggregating claims to meet the amount in controversy—(1) Aggregating claims in appeals
of QIC reconsiderations for an ALJ hearing. Either an individual appellant or multiple
appellants may aggregate two or more claims to meet the amount in controversy for an ALJ
hearing if—

(i) The claims were previously reconsidered by a QIC;

(ii) The appellant(s) requests aggregation of claims appealed in the same request for ALJ
hearing, or in multiple requests for an ALJ hearing filed with the same request for
aggregation, and the request is filed within 60 calendar days after receipt of all of the
reconsiderations being appealed; and

(iii) The claims that a single appellant seeks to aggregate involve the delivery of similar
or related services, or the claims that multiple appellants seek to aggregate involve common
issues of law and fact, as determined by an ALJ or attorney adjudicator. Only an ALJ may
determine the claims that a single appellant seeks to aggregate do not involve the delivery
of similar or related services, or the claims that multiple appellants seek to aggregate do
not involve common issues of law and fact. Part A and Part B claims may be combined to meet
the amount in controversy requirements.

(2) Aggregating claims that are escalated from the QIC level for an ALJ hearing. Either an
individual appellant or multiple appellants may aggregate two or more claims to meet the
amount in controversy for an ALJ hearing if—

(i) The claims were pending before the QIC in conjunction with the same request for
reconsideration;

(ii) The appellant(s) requests aggregation of the claims for an ALJ hearing in the same
request for escalation; and

(iii) The claims that a single appellant seeks to aggregate involve the delivery of similar
or related services, or the claims that multiple appellants seek to aggregate involve common
issues of law and fact, as determined by an ALJ or attorney adjudicator. Only an ALJ may
determine the claims that a single appellant seeks to aggregate do not involve the delivery
of similar or related services, or the claims that multiple appellants seek to aggregate do
not involve common issues of law and fact. Part A and Part B claims may be combined to meet
the amount in controversy requirements.

(f) Content of request for aggregation. When an appellant(s) seeks to aggregate claims in a
request for an ALJ hearing, the appellant(s) must—

(1) Specify all of the claims the appellant(s) seeks to aggregate; and

(2) State why the appellant(s) believes that the claims involve common issues of law and
fact or delivery of similar or related services.
