
42 CFR Part 412 - Prospective Payment Systems for Inpatient Hospital Services
=============================================================================


§ 412.1 Scope of part.
----------------------

(a) Purpose. (1) This part implements sections 1886(d) and (g) of the Act by establishing a
prospective payment system for the operating costs of inpatient hospital services furnished
to Medicare beneficiaries in cost reporting periods beginning on or after October 1, 1983,
and a prospective payment system for the capital-related costs of inpatient hospital
services furnished to Medicare beneficiaries in cost reporting periods beginning on or after
October 1, 1991.

(i) Under these prospective payment systems, payment for the operating and capital-related
costs of inpatient hospital services furnished by hospitals subject to the systems
(generally, short-term, acute-care hospitals) is made on the basis of prospectively
determined rates and applied on a per discharge basis.

(ii) Payment for other costs related to inpatient hospital services is made on a reasonable
cost basis as follows:

(A) Organ acquisition costs incurred by hospitals with approved organ transplant programs.

(B) The costs of qualified nonphysician anesthetist's services, as described in §
412.113(c).

(C) Direct costs of approved nursing and allied health educational programs.

(D) Costs related to hematopoietic stem cell acquisition for the purpose of an allogeneic
hematopoietic stem cell transplant as described in § 412.113(e).

(iii) Payment for the direct costs of graduate medical education is made on a per resident
amount basis in accordance with §§ 413.75 through 413.83 of this chapter.

(iv) Additional payments are made for outlier cases, bad debts, indirect medical education
costs, for serving a disproportionate share of low-income patients, for the additional
resource costs of domestic National Institute for Occupational Safety and Health approved
surgical N95 respirators, and for the additional resource costs for small, independent
hospitals to establish and maintain access to buffer stocks of essential medicines.

(v) Under either prospective payment system, a hospital may keep the difference between its
prospective payment rate and its operating or capital-related costs incurred in furnishing
inpatient services, and the hospital is at risk for inpatient operating or inpatient
capital-related costs that exceed its payment rate.

(2) This part implements section 124 of Public Law 106-113 by establishing a per diem
prospective payment system for the inpatient operating and capital costs of hospital
inpatient services furnished to Medicare beneficiaries by a psychiatric facility that meets
the conditions of subpart N of this part.

(3) This part implements section 1886(j) of the Act by establishing a prospective payment
system for the inpatient operating and capital costs of inpatient hospital services
furnished to Medicare beneficiaries by a rehabilitation hospital or rehabilitation unit that
meets the conditions of § 412.604.

(4) This part implements the following regarding long-term care hospitals—

(i) Section 123 of Public Law 106-113, which provides for the establishment of a prospective
payment system for the costs of inpatient hospital services furnished to Medicare
beneficiaries by long-term care hospitals described in section 1886(d)(1)(B)(iv) of the Act,
for cost reporting periods beginning on or after October 1, 2002.

(ii) The provisions of section 307(b) of Public Law 106-554, which state that the Secretary
shall examine and may provide for appropriate adjustments to the long-term care hospital
prospective payment system, including adjustments to diagnosis-related group (DRG) weights,
area wage adjustments, geographic reclassification, outlier adjustments, updates, and
disproportionate share adjustments consistent with section 1886(d)(5)(F) of the Act.

(iii) Section 114 of Public Law 110-173, which contains several provisions regarding long-
term care hospitals, including the—

(A) Amendment of section 1886 of the Act to add a new subsection (m) that references section
123 of Public Law 106-113 and section 307(b) of Public Law 106-554 for the establishment and
implementation of a prospective payment system for payments under title XVIII for inpatient
hospital services furnished by a long-term care hospital described in section
1886(d)(1)(B)(iv) of the Act.

(B) Revision of the standard Federal rate for RY 2008.

(5) This part implements section 1886(q) of the Act, which provides that, effective for
discharges from an “applicable hospital” beginning on or after October 1, 2012, payments to
those hospitals under section 1886(d) of the Act will be reduced to account for certain
excess readmissions, under the Hospital Readmissions Reduction Program. This reduction will
be made through an adjustment to the hospital's base operating DRG payment amounts under the
prospective payment system for inpatient operating costs.

(6) This part implements section 1886(o)(1)(B) of the Act, which directs the Secretary to
begin to make value-based incentive payments under the Hospital Value-Based Purchasing
Program to hospitals for discharges occurring on or after October 1, 2012, through an
adjustment to the base operating DRG payment amounts under the prospective payment system
for inpatient operating costs.

(7) This part implements section 1866(k) of the Act, which directs hospitals described in
section 1886(d)(1)(B)(v) of the Act to submit data on quality measures to the Secretary.

(b) Summary of content. (1) This subpart describes the basis of payment for inpatient
hospital services under the prospective payment systems specified in paragraph (a)(1) of
this section and sets forth the general basis of these systems.

(2) Subpart B of this part sets forth all of the following:

(i)(A) The classifications of hospitals that are included in and excluded from the
prospective payment systems specified in paragraph (a)(1) of this section.

(B) Requirements governing the inclusion or exclusion of hospitals in the systems as a
result of changes in their classification.

(ii) Requirements for the PPS-Exempt Cancer Hospital Quality Reporting (PCHQR) Program.

(3) Subpart C sets forth certain conditions that must be met for a hospital to receive
payment under the prospective payment systems specified in paragraph (a)(1) of this section.

(4) Subpart D sets forth the basic methodology by which prospective payment rates for
inpatient operating costs are determined under the prospective payment system specified in
paragraph (a)(1) of this section.

(5) Subpart E describes the transition ratesetting methods that are used to determine
transition payment rates for inpatient operating costs during the first 4 years of the
prospective payment system specified in paragraph (a)(1) of this section.

(6) Subpart F sets forth the methodology for determining payments for outlier cases under
the prospective payment system specified in paragraph (a)(1) of this section.

(7) Subpart G sets forth rules for special treatment of certain facilities under the
prospective payment system specified in paragraph (a)(1) of this section for inpatient
operating costs.

(8) Subpart H describes the types, amounts, and methods of payment to hospitals under the
prospective payment system specified in paragraph (a)(1) of this section for inpatient
operating costs.

(9) Subpart K describes how the prospective payment system specified in paragraph (a)(1) of
this section for inpatient operating costs is implemented for hospitals located in Puerto
Rico.

(10) Subpart L sets forth the procedures and criteria concerning applications from hospitals
to the Medicare Geographic Classification Review Board for geographic redesignation under
the prospective payment systems specified in paragraph (a)(1) of this section.

(11) Subpart M describes how the prospective payment system specified in paragraph (a)(1) of
this section for inpatient capital-related costs is implemented effective with reporting
periods beginning on or after October 1, 1991.

(12) Subpart N describes the prospective payment system specified in paragraph (a)(2) of
this section for inpatient psychiatric facilities and sets forth the general methodology for
paying the operating and capital-related costs of inpatient hospital services furnished by
inpatient psychiatric facilities effective with cost reporting periods beginning on or after
January 1, 2005.

(13) Subpart O of this part describes the prospective payment system specified in paragraph
(a)(4) of this section for long-term care hospitals and sets forth the general methodology
for paying for the operating and capital-related costs of inpatient hospital services
furnished by long-term care hospitals, effective with cost reporting periods beginning on or
after October 1, 2002.

(14) Subpart P describes the prospective payment system specified in paragraph (a)(3) of
this section for rehabilitation hospitals and rehabilitation units and sets forth the
general methodology for paying for the operating and capital-related costs of inpatient
hospital services furnished by rehabilitation hospitals and rehabilitation units effective
with cost reporting periods beginning on or after January 1, 2002.


----------------------------------------------------------------------


§ 412.2 Basis of payment.
-------------------------

(a) Payment on a per discharge basis. Under both the inpatient operating and inpatient
capital-related prospective payment systems, hospitals are paid a predetermined amount per
discharge for inpatient hospital services furnished to Medicare beneficiaries. The
prospective payment rate for each discharge (as defined in § 412.4) is determined according
to the methodology described in subpart D, E, or G of this part, as appropriate, for
operating costs, and according to the methodology described in subpart M of this part for
capital-related costs. An additional payment is made for both inpatient operating and
inpatient capital-related costs, in accordance with subpart F of this part, for cases that
are extraordinarily costly to treat.

(b) Payment in full. (1) The prospective payment amount paid for inpatient hospital services
is the total Medicare payment for the inpatient operating costs (as described in paragraph
(c) of this section) and the inpatient capital-related costs (as described in paragraph (d)
of this section) incurred in furnishing services covered by the Medicare program.

(2) The full prospective payment amount, as determined under subpart D, E, or G and under
subpart M of this part, is made for each stay during which there is at least one Medicare
payable day of care. Payable days of care, for purposes of this paragraph include the
following:

(i) Limitation of liability days payable under the payment procedures for custodial care and
services that are not reasonable and necessary as specified in § 411.400 of this chapter.

(ii) Guarantee of payment days, as authorized under § 409.68 of this chapter, for inpatient
hospital services furnished to an individual whom the hospital has reason to believe is
entitled to Medicare benefits at the time of admission.

(3) If a patient is admitted to an acute care hospital and then the acute care hospital
meets the criteria at § 412.23(e) to be paid as a LTCH, during the course of the patient's
hospitalization, Medicare considers all the days of the patient stay in the facility (days
prior to and after the designation of LTCH status) to be a single episode of LTCH care.
Medicare will not make payment under subpart H for any part of the hospitalization. Payment
for the entire patient stay (days prior to and after the designation of LTCH status) will be
made in accordance with the requirements specified in § 412.521. The requirements of this
paragraph (b)(3) apply only to a patient stay in which a patient is in an acute care
hospital and that hospital is designated as a LTCH on or after October 1, 2004.

(c) Inpatient operating costs. The prospective payment system provides a payment amount for
inpatient operating costs, including—

(1) Operating costs for routine services (as described in § 413.53(b) of this chapter), such
as the costs of room, board, and routine nursing services;

(2) Operating costs for ancillary services, such as radiology and laboratory services
furnished to hospital inpatients;

(3) Special care unit operating costs (intensive care type unit services, as described in §
413.53(b) of this chapter);

(4) Malpractice insurance costs related to services furnished to inpatients; and

(5) Preadmission services otherwise payable under Medicare Part B furnished to a beneficiary
on the date of the beneficiary's admission to the hospital and during the 3 calendar days
immediately preceding the date of the beneficiary's admission to the hospital that meet the
condition specified in paragraph (c)(5)(i) of this section and at least one of the
conditions specified in paragraphs (c)(5)(ii) through (c)(5)(iv).

(i) The services are furnished by the hospital or by an entity wholly owned or operated by
the hospital. An entity is wholly owned by the hospital if the hospital is the sole owner of
the entity. An entity is wholly operated by a hospital if the hospital has exclusive
responsibility for conducting and overseeing the entity's routine operations, regardless of
whether the hospital also has policymaking authority over the entity.

(ii) For services furnished after January 1, 1991, the services are diagnostic (including
clinical diagnostic laboratory tests).

(iii) For services furnished on or after October 1, 1991, through June 24, 2010, the
services are furnished in connection with the principal diagnosis that requires the
beneficiary to be admitted as an inpatient and are not the following:

(A) Ambulance services.

(B) Maintenance renal dialysis.

(iv) Nondiagnostic services furnished on or after June 25, 2010, other than ambulance
services and maintenance renal dialysis services, that are furnished on the date of the
beneficiary's inpatient admission or on the first, second, or third calendar day immediately
preceding the date of the beneficiary's inpatient admission and the hospital does not attest
that such services are unrelated to the beneficiary's inpatient admission.

(d) Inpatient capital-related costs. For cost reporting periods beginning on or after
October 1, 1991, the capital prospective payment system provides a payment amount for
inpatient hospital capital-related costs as described in part 413, subpart G of this
chapter.

(e) Excluded costs. The following inpatient hospital costs are excluded from the prospective
payment amounts and are paid for on a reasonable cost basis:

(1) Capital-related costs for cost reporting periods beginning before October 1, 1991, and
an allowance for return on equity, as described in §§ 413.130 and 413.157, respectively, of
this chapter.

(2) Direct medical education costs for approved nursing and allied health education programs
as described in § 413.85 of this chapter.

(3) Costs for direct medical and surgical services of physicians in teaching hospitals
exercising the election in § 405.521 of this chapter.

(4) The acquisition costs of hearts, kidneys, livers, lungs, pancreas, and intestines (or
multivisceral organs) incurred by approved transplant programs.

(5) The costs of qualified nonphysician anesthetists' services, as described in §
412.113(c).

(6) For cost reporting periods beginning on or after October 1, 2020, the costs of allogenic
hematopoietic stem cell acquisition, as described in § 412.113(e), for the purpose of an
allogeneic hematopoietic stem cell transplant.

(f) Additional payments to hospitals. In addition to payments based on the prospective
payment system rates for inpatient operating and inpatient capital-related costs, hospitals
receive payments for the following:

(1) Outlier cases, as described in subpart F of this part.

(2) The indirect costs of graduate medical education, as specified in subparts F and G of
this part and in § 412.105 for inpatient operating costs and in § 412.322 for inpatient
capital-related costs.

(3) Costs excluded from the prospective payment rates under paragraph (e) of this section,
as provided in § 412.115.

(4) Bad debts of Medicare beneficiaries, as provided in § 412.115(a).

(5) ESRD beneficiary discharges if such discharges are ten percent or more of the hospital's
total Medicare discharges, as provided in § 412.104.

(6) Serving a disproportionate share of low-income patients, as provided in § 412.106 for
inpatient operating costs and § 412.320 for inpatient capital-related costs.

(7) The direct graduate medical education costs for approved residency programs in medicine,
osteopathy, dentistry, and podiatry as described in §§ 413.75-413.83 of this chapter.

(8) For discharges on or after June 19, 1990, and before October 1, 1994, and for discharges
on or after October 1, 1997, a payment amount per unit for blood clotting factor provided to
Medicare inpatients who have hemophilia. For discharges occurring on or after October 1,
2005, the additional payment is made based on the average sales price methodology specified
in subpart K, part 414 of this subchapter and the furnishing fee specified in § 410.63 of
this subchapter.

(9) Special additional payment for certain new technology as specified in §§ 412.87 and
412.88 of subpart F.

(10) A payment adjustment for the additional resource costs of domestic National Institute
for Occupational Safety and Health approved surgical N95 respirators as specified in §
412.113.

(11) A payment adjustment for small, independent hospitals for the additional resource costs
of establishing and maintaining access to buffer stocks of essential medicines as specified
in § 412.113.

(g) Payment adjustment for certain replaced devices. CMS makes a payment adjustment for
certain replaced devices, as provided under § 412.89.


----------------------------------------------------------------------


§ 412.3 Admissions.
-------------------

(a) For purposes of payment under Medicare Part A, an individual is considered an inpatient
of a hospital, including a critical access hospital, if formally admitted as an inpatient
pursuant to an order for inpatient admission by a physician or other qualified practitioner
in accordance with this section and §§ 482.24(c), 482.12(c), and 485.638(a)(4)(iii) of this
chapter for a critical access hospital. In addition, inpatient rehabilitation facilities
also must adhere to the admission requirements specified in § 412.622.

(b) The order must be furnished by a qualified and licensed practitioner who has admitting
privileges at the hospital as permitted by State law, and who is knowledgeable about the
patient's hospital course, medical plan of care, and current condition. The practitioner may
not delegate the decision (order) to another individual who is not authorized by the State
to admit patients, or has not been granted admitting privileges applicable to that patient
by the hospital's medical staff.

(c) The physician order must be furnished at or before the time of the inpatient admission.

(d)(1) Except as specified in paragraphs (d)(2) and (3) of this section, an inpatient
admission is generally appropriate for payment under Medicare Part A when the admitting
physician expects the patient to require hospital care that crosses two midnights.

(i) The expectation of the physician should be based on such complex medical factors as
patient history and comorbidities, the severity of signs and symptoms, current medical
needs, and the risk of an adverse event. The factors that lead to a particular clinical
expectation must be documented in the medical record in order to be granted consideration.

(ii) If an unforeseen circumstance, such as a beneficiary's death or transfer, results in a
shorter beneficiary stay than the physician's expectation of at least 2 midnights, the
patient may be considered to be appropriately treated on an inpatient basis, and payment for
an inpatient hospital stay may be made under Medicare Part A.

(2) An inpatient admission for a surgical procedure specified by Medicare as inpatient only
under § 419.22(n) of this chapter is generally appropriate for payment under Medicare Part A
regardless of the expected duration of care. Procedures no longer specified as inpatient
only under § 419.22(n) of this chapter are appropriate for payment under Medicare Part A in
accordance with paragraph (d)(1) or (3) of this section. Claims for services and procedures
removed from the inpatient only list under § 419.22 of this chapter on or after January 1,
2021 are exempt from certain medical review activities until the Secretary determines that
the service or procedure is more commonly performed in the outpatient setting than the
inpatient setting.

(3) Where the admitting physician expects a patient to require hospital care for only a
limited period of time that does not cross 2 midnights, an inpatient admission may be
appropriate for payment under Medicare Part A based on the clinical judgment of the
admitting physician and medical record support for that determination. The physician's
decision should be based on such complex medical factors as patient history and
comorbidities, the severity of signs and symptoms, current medical needs, and the risk of an
adverse event. In these cases, the factors that lead to the decision to admit the patient as
an inpatient must be supported by the medical record in order to be granted consideration.


----------------------------------------------------------------------


§ 412.4 Discharges and transfers.
---------------------------------

(a) Discharges. Subject to the provisions of paragraphs (b) and (c) of this section, a
hospital inpatient is considered discharged from a hospital paid under the prospective
payment system when—

(1) The patient is formally released from the hospital; or

(2) The patient dies in the hospital.

(b) Acute care transfers. A discharge of a hospital inpatient is considered to be a transfer
for purposes of payment under this part if the patient is readmitted the same day (unless
the readmission is unrelated to the initial discharge) to another hospital that is—

(1) Paid under the prospective payment system described in subparts A through M of this
part;

(2) Excluded from being paid under the prospective payment system described in subparts A
through M of this part because of participation in an approved statewide cost control
program as described in subpart C of part 403 of this chapter;

(3) An acute care hospital that would otherwise be eligible to be paid under the IPPS, but
does not have an agreement to participate in the Medicare program; or

(4) A critical access hospital.

(c) Postacute care transfers. A discharge of a hospital inpatient is considered to be a
transfer for purposes of this part when the patient's discharge is assigned, as described in
§ 412.60(c), to one of the qualifying diagnosis-related groups (DRGs) listed in paragraph
(d) of this section and the discharge is made under any of the following circumstances:

(1) To a hospital or distinct part hospital unit excluded from the prospective payment
system described in subparts A through M of this part under subpart B of this part.

(2) To a skilled nursing facility.

(3) To home under a written plan of care for the provision of home health services from a
home health agency and those services begin within 3 days after the date of discharge.

(4) For discharges occurring on or after October 1, 2018, to hospice care provided by a
hospice program.

(d) Qualifying DRGs. (1) For a fiscal year prior to FY 2006, for purposes of paragraph (c)
of this section, and subject to the provisions of paragraph (d)(2) of this section, the
qualifying DRGs must meet the following criteria for both of the 2 most recent years for
which data are available:

(i) The DRG must have a geometric mean length of stay of at least 3 days.

(ii) The DRG must have at least 14,000 cases identified as postacute care transfer cases.

(iii) The DRG must have at least 10 percent of the postacute care transfers occurring before
the geometric mean length of stay for the DRG.

(iv) If the DRG is one of a paired DRG based on the presence or absence of a comorbidity or
complication, one of the DRGs meets the criteria specified under paragraphs (d)(1)(i)
through (d)(1)(iii) of this section.

(v) To initially qualify, the DRG must meet the criteria specified in paragraphs (d)(1)(i)
through (d)(1)(iv) of this section and must have a decline in the geometric mean length of
stay for the DRG during the most recent 5 years of at least 7 percent. Once a DRG initially
qualifies, the DRG is subject to the criteria specified in paragraphs (d)(1)(i) through
(d)(1)(iv) of this section for each subsequent fiscal year.

(2) For purposes of paragraph (c), a discharge is also considered to be a transfer if it
meets the following conditions:

(i) The discharge is assigned to a DRG that contains only cases that were assigned to a DRG
that qualified under this paragraph within the previous 2 years; and

(ii) The latter DRG was split or otherwise modified within the previous 2 fiscal years.

(3) For fiscal years beginning with FY 2006, for purposes of paragraph (c) of this section—

(i) The qualifying DRGs must meet the following criteria using data from the March 2005
update of the FY 2004 MedPAR file and Version 23.0 of the DRG Definitions Manual (FY 2006):

(A) The DRG has at least 2,050 total postacute care transfer cases;

(B) At least 5.5 percent of the cases in the DRG are discharged to postacute care prior to
the geometric mean length of stay for the DRG;

(C) The DRG must have a geometric mean length of stay greater than 3 days;

(D) The DRG is paired with a DRG based on the presence or absence of a comorbidity or
complication or major cardiovascular condition that, it meets the criteria specified in
paragraphs (d)(3)(i)(A) and (d)(3)(ii)(B) of this section.

(ii) If a DRG did not exist in Version 23.0 of the DRG Definitions Manual or a DRG included
in Version 23.0 of the DRG Definitions Manual is revised, the DRG will be a qualifying DRG
if it meets the following criteria based on the version of the DRG Definitions Manual in use
when the new or revised DRG first becomes effective, using the most recent complete year of
MedPAR data:

(A) The total number of discharges to postacute care in the DRG must equal or exceed the
55th percentile for all DRGs;

(B) The proportion of short-stay discharges to postacute care to total discharges in the DRG
exceeds the 55th percentile for all DRGs;

(C) The DRG is paired with a DRG based on the presence or absence of a comorbidity or a
complication or major cardiovascular condition that meets the criteria specified under
paragraphs (d)(3)(ii)(A) and (d)(3)(ii)(B) of this section; and

(D) In the case of MS-DRGs that share the same base MS-DRG, if one MS-DRG meets the criteria
specified under paragraph (d)(3)(ii)(B) of this section, every MS-DRG that shares the same
base MS-DRG is a qualifying DRG.

(e) Payment for discharges. The hospital discharging an inpatient (under paragraph (a) of
this section) is paid in full, in accordance with § 412.2(b).

(f) Payment for transfers—(1) General rule. Except as provided in paragraph (f)(2) or (f)(3)
of this section, a hospital that transfers an inpatient under the circumstances described in
paragraph (b) or (c) of this section, is paid a graduated per diem rate for each day of the
patient's stay in that hospital, not to exceed the amount that would have been paid under
subparts D and M of this part if the patient had been discharged to another setting. The per
diem rate is determined by dividing the appropriate prospective payment rate (as determined
under subparts D and M of this part) by the geometric mean length of stay for the specific
DRG to which the case is assigned. Payment is graduated by paying twice the per diem amount
for the first day of the stay, and the per diem amount for each subsequent day, up to the
full DRG payment.

(2) Special rule for DRGs 209, 210, and 211 for fiscal years prior to FY 2006. For fiscal
years prior to FY 2006, a hospital that transfers an inpatient under the circumstances
described in paragraph (c) of this section and the transfer is assigned to DRGs 209, 210, or
211 is paid as follows:

(i) 50 percent of the appropriate prospective payment rate (as determined under subparts D
and M of this part) for the first day of the stay; and

(ii) 50 percent of the amount calculated under paragraph (f)(1) of this section for each day
of the stay, up to the full DRG payment.

(3) Transfer assigned to DRG for newborns that die or are transferred to another hospital.
If a transfer is classified into CMS DRG 385 (Neonates, Died or Transferred) prior to
October 1, 2007, or into MS-DRG 789 (Neonates, Died or Transferred to Another Acute Care
Facility) on or after October 1, 2007, the transferring hospital is paid in accordance with
§ 412.2(b).

(4) Outliers. Effective with discharges occurring on or after October 1, 1984, a
transferring hospital may qualify for an additional payment for extraordinarily high-cost
cases that meet the criteria for cost outliers as described in subpart F of this part.

(5) Special rule for DRGs meeting specific criteria. For discharges occurring on or after
October 1, 2005, and prior to October 1, 2007, a hospital that transfers an inpatient under
the circumstances described in paragraph (c) of this section is paid using the provisions of
paragraphs (f)(2)(i) and (f)(2)(ii) of this section if the transfer case is assigned to one
of the DRGs meeting the following criteria:

(i) The DRG meets the criteria specified in paragraph (d)(3)(i) or (d)(3)(ii) of this
section.

(ii) The average charges of the 1-day discharge cases in the DRG must be at least 50 percent
of the average charges for all cases in the DRG; and

(iii) The geometric mean length of stay for the DRG is greater than 4 days; and

(iv) If a DRG is paired with a DRG based on the presence or absence of a comorbidity or
complication or a major cardiovascular complication that meets the criteria specified in
paragraphs (f)(5)(i) through (f)(5)(iii) of this section, that DRG will also be paid under
the provisions of paragraphs (f)(2)(i) and (f)(2)(ii) of this section.

(6) Special rule for DRGs meeting specific criteria. For discharges occurring on or after
October 1, 2007, a hospital that transfers an inpatient under the circumstances described in
paragraph (c) of this section is paid using the provisions of paragraphs (f)(2)(i) and
(f)(2)(ii) of this section if the transfer case is assigned to one of the DRGs meeting the
following criteria:

(i) The DRG meets the criteria specified in paragraph (d)(3)(i) or (d)(3)(ii) of this
section;

(ii) The average charges of the 1-day discharge cases in the DRG must be at least 50 percent
of the average charges for all cases in the DRG; and

(iii) The geometric mean length of stay for the DRG is greater than 4 days.

(iv) If a DRG is part of an MS-DRG group that meets the criteria specified in paragraphs
(f)(6)(i) through (f)(6)(iii) of this section, that DRG will also be paid under the
provisions of paragraphs (f)(2)(i) and (f)(2)(ii) of this section.
