
--- page 1 ---
50941 Federal Register / Vol. 78, No. 160 / Monday, August 19, 2013 / Rules and Regulations 
extended stays described in § 424.13(e) 
through (g)). Similarly, we are providing 
in the regulations on the certification 
that the certification begins with the 
order for inpatient admission. We are 
adding this as the new first sentence in 
§§ 424.13(a), 424.14(a), and 424.15(b) for 
CAHs. Also, we are including a 
conforming amendment in new 
paragraph (d)(5) of § 424.11 that, for 
hospital or CAH hospital inpatient 
services, a delayed certification may not 
extend past discharge. The existing 
delayed certification provisions in 
existing § 424.11(d)(3) and (d)(4) will 
continue to apply, but only for 
certification of the outlier extended stay 
cases described in § 424.13(e) through 
(g). 
To clarify that the rules for timing of 
certification and recertification for 
‘‘cases not subject to the PPS’’ in 
redesignated paragraphs (e) through (h) 
of § 424.13 apply only to IPPS outlier 
cases, we are adding the word ‘‘outlier’’ 
prior to the phrase ‘‘subject to the PPS’’ 
in paragraphs (e), (f), (g), and (h). 
We are finalizing two conforming 
amendments in the regulation text 
governing physician certification. In 
§ 424.11(e)(2), we are removing the 
reference ‘‘§ 424.13(c)’’ and adding in its 
place ‘‘§ 424.13(d)’’ as redesignated. 
Similarly, we are amending § 424.16(a) 
by removing the reference ‘‘§ 424.13(e)’’ 
and adding it its place ‘‘subpart B of this 
Part’’. 
Comment: Several commenters asked 
what Medicare’s payment rules would 
be regarding verbal inpatient admission 
orders. For example, the commenters 
asked whether the hospital could 
submit a Part A claim based upon a 
verbal order that is not documented in 
the medical record at the time the claim 
is submitted. In addition, the 
commenters asked how CMS defines 
‘‘prompt’’ authentication of orders, or 
address verbal order ‘‘read-back’’ 
processes. 
Response: Because the physician 
order is required as a condition of 
payment, if the order is not documented 
in the medical record, the hospital 
should not submit a claim for Part A 
payment. A verbal order is a temporary 
administrative convenience for the 
physician and hospital staff but it is not 
a substitute for a properly documented 
and authenticated order for inpatient 
admission. A verbal order must be 
properly countersigned by the 
practitioner who gave the verbal order. 
We intend to further discuss and 
develop our requirements regarding 
verbal orders for inpatient admission in 
our subregulatory guidance. The CoPs 
regarding verbal orders were carefully 
developed over a period time, and we 
believe we should take additional time 
to consider and potentially coordinate 
the CoP and payment rules. 
Comment: Some commenters believed 
that, while the order should be 
documented in the medical record as a 
best practice, documentation of the 
order should not be required if it is 
unintentionally omitted. They believed 
that the order is a technicality that 
should not serve as a condition of 
payment. The commenters stated that if 
the order to admit is missing, yet the 
physician intent and physician 
recommendation to admit to inpatient 
can clearly be derived from the medical 
record, for example if a medically 
necessary inpatient-only service was 
furnished, the contractor should 
consider these rather than requiring the 
physician order as a technical 
requirement for medical necessity and 
payment. 
Response: The admission order is 
evidence of the decision by the 
physician (or other practitioner who can 
order inpatient services) to admit the 
beneficiary to inpatient status. In very 
rare circumstances, the order to admit 
may be missing or defective (that is, 
illegible or incomplete), yet the intent, 
decision, and recommendation of the 
physician (or other practitioner who can 
order inpatient services) to admit the 
beneficiary as an inpatient can clearly 
be derived from the medical record. In 
these rare situations, we have provided 
contractors with discretion to determine 
that this information constructively 
satisfies the requirement that the 
hospital inpatient admission order be 
present in the medical record. However, 
in order for the documentation to 
provide acceptable evidence to support 
the hospital inpatient admission, thus 
satisfying the requirement for the 
physician order, there can be no 
uncertainty regarding the intent, 
decision, and recommendation by the 
physician (or other practitioner who can 
order inpatient services) to admit the 
beneficiary as an inpatient, and no 
reasonable possibility that the care 
could have been adequately provided in 
an outpatient setting. This narrow and 
limited alternative method of satisfying 
the requirement for documentation of 
the inpatient admission order in the 
medical record should be extremely 
rare, and may only be applied at the 
discretion of the medical review 
contractor. Even in those circumstances, 
all requirements for the other 
components of the physician 
certification must be met. 
Comment: Several commenters asked 
CMS to clarify whether, when a 
beneficiary would become an inpatient 
under the proposed policies, inpatient 
status would be conferred retroactive to 
the beginning of the hospital stay. One 
commenter recommended that the 
patient become inpatient after the 
physician writes the order and the 
patient starts receiving care based on 
those orders, whether or not it is in a 
bed on an inpatient nursing unit, a 
holding bed in the emergency 
department or another location, or 
whether the patient is sent to imaging or 
the operating room first. One 
commenter questioned what CMS meant 
by the term ‘‘outpatient status.’’ Another 
commenter questioned CMS’ current 
definition of ‘‘inpatient,’’ stating it is not 
defined in the Act. The commenter 
stated that, at the time of the law’s 
passage, the meaning of ‘‘inpatient’’ was 
obvious and universal. The commenter 
stated that a patient that stays in a 
hospital is an inpatient, whereas a 
patient that goes home after treatment, 
or after a limited recovery period such 
as a few hours, is an outpatient. 
Response: As explained in the 
proposed rule, in response to concerns 
and suggestions of stakeholders, we 
aimed to provide more clarity regarding 
hospital inpatient admissions and 
Medicare payment. Toward those ends, 
in the FY 2014 IPPS/LTCH PPS 
proposed rule, we addressed medical 
review criteria and proposed to codify 
in regulation our longstanding policy (as 
reflected in manual provisions) that a 
patient becomes an inpatient when 
formally admitted as such pursuant to a 
physician order. CMS’ definition of 
‘‘inpatient’’ has been upheld in 
litigation. Landers v. Leavitt, 545 F.3d 
98 (2
d Cir. 2008). We did not propose 
policy changes regarding the definition 
of ‘‘inpatient’’ or inpatient status. In 
contrast to a hospital inpatient, we have 
defined a hospital outpatient in the 
MBPM, Chapter 6, Section 20, as ‘‘a 
person who has not been admitted by 
the hospital as an inpatient but is 
registered on the hospital records as an 
outpatient and receives services (rather 
than supplies alone) from the hospital 
or CAH.’’ 
This final rule provides that a 
beneficiary is considered a hospital 
inpatient following formal admission 
‘‘pursuant to’’ the hospital inpatient 
admission order. We included the 
phrase ‘‘pursuant to’’ in recognition 
that, in most cases, the beneficiary is 
formally admitted and becomes a 
hospital inpatient concurrent with the 
physician order to admit to inpatient. 
However, in cases such as elective 
surgeries where the inpatient admission 
order is written as far as several weeks 
in advance, the beneficiary is not 
considered an inpatient until the time of 
formal admission at the hospital for the 
VerDate Mar<15>2010 21:51 Aug 16, 2013 Jkt 229001 PO 00000 Frm 00447 Fmt 4701 Sfmt 4700 E:\FR\FM\19AUR2.SGM 19AUR2bjneal on DSK2TWX8P1PROD with RULES
--- page 2 ---
50942 Federal Register / Vol. 78, No. 160 / Monday, August 19, 2013 / Rules and Regulations 
inpatient services. In this example, the 
beneficiary is admitted and becomes an 
inpatient pursuant to the physician’s 
order and could not be admitted 
without it, although there may be a time 
lag between when the order to admit is 
written and the time of formal 
admission. The physician order cannot 
be effective retroactively. In this final 
rule, we are not changing our definition 
of a ‘‘hospital inpatient.’’ Inpatient 
status only applies prospectively, 
starting from the time the patient is 
formally admitted pursuant to a 
physician order for inpatient admission, 
in accordance with our current policy. 
Comment: Several commenters 
expressed the opinion that physicians 
should not have to divide their attention 
between providing patient care and 
understanding Medicare’s admission 
rules, which the commenters viewed as 
mere billing distinctions. Some 
commenters believed that CMS should 
allow physicians to delegate the 
determination of patient status to the 
hospital or its utilization review 
committee, while the physician focuses 
on ordering and providing the necessary 
clinical care. Further, some commenters 
stated that this is their current practice. 
Some commenters commented that their 
current processes provide for admission 
‘‘to case management’’ or ‘‘to utilization 
review’’ rather than specifying inpatient 
admission. 
Response: As we discussed above, 
many public comments from physicians 
indicated that they believed the 
physician should be involved in the 
determination of patient status, and we 
agree. To reinforce this policy and 
reduce confusion among hospitals, 
beneficiaries, and physicians on the 
differences between outpatient 
observation and inpatient services, we 
are providing in this final rule that the 
order for inpatient admission must 
specify admission ‘‘to or as an 
inpatient.’’ In previous discussions, 
stakeholders have indicated that often 
physician orders only specify admission 
to a certain location in the hospital (for 
example, ‘‘Admit to Tower 7’’) or do not 
clarify whether the physician’s intent is 
to ‘‘admit’’ the beneficiary for outpatient 
observation services or for hospital 
inpatient services. Therefore, we are 
providing that, for payment of hospital 
inpatient services under Medicare Part 
A, the order must specify the admitting 
practitioner’s recommendation to admit 
‘‘to inpatient,’’ ‘‘as an inpatient,’’ ‘‘for 
inpatient services,’’ or similar language 
specifying his or her recommendation 
for inpatient care. In addition, as 
discussed in the proposed rule (78 FR 
27646), we remind hospitals that 
patients are admitted to the hospital 
only on the recommendation of a 
physician or licensed practitioner 
permitted by the State to admit patients 
to a hospital, provided that the 
practitioner, either a physician or other 
licensed practitioner, has been granted 
such privileges by the hospital to do so. 
Hospitals and physicians routinely must 
work together to comply with billing, 
coding, and admission rules not just for 
Medicare, but also for Medicaid and 
private payers. 
b. Authorization to Sign the Physician 
Order 
We proposed new regulation 
provisions in 42 CFR 412.3(b) which 
state that, as a condition of payment, the 
order must be furnished by a qualified 
and licensed practitioner who has 
admitting privileges at the hospital as 
permitted by State law, and who is 
responsible for the inpatient care of the 
patient at the hospital. The practitioner 
could not delegate the decision (order) 
to another individual who is not 
responsible for the care of that patient, 
is not authorized by the State to admit 
patients, or has not been granted 
admitting privileges applicable to that 
patient by the hospital’s medical staff. 
Comment: Commenters in the 
physician and Medicare contractor 
medical review communities generally 
supported the proposal to require the 
inpatient admission order, and to 
provide that it could not be delegated to 
another individual who does not 
possess the authority to order inpatient 
admission in his or her own right. In 
addition, some commenters 
representing hospitals did not object to 
this requirement because it is already 
standard practice. However, the 
commenters described a number of 
situations in which the ordering 
practitioner would appropriately not be 
the individual who takes responsibility 
for the inpatient care of the beneficiary, 
or for the entirety of the inpatient care. 
According to the commenters, these 
included emergency department 
physicians, hospitalists and other types 
of physicians in group practices who 
care for patients in the hospital, and 
residents working under the supervision 
of attending physicians. The 
commenters requested that if CMS 
finalizes a requirement for the inpatient 
order as a condition of Part A payment, 
CMS should allow it to be issued by any 
physician in the hospital who is 
knowledgeable about the beneficiary’s 
condition and has admitting privileges 
at the hospital. 
Response: We agree with the 
commenters that it would be 
appropriate to allow practitioners who 
may not be responsible for the inpatient 
hospital care of the beneficiary but are 
otherwise qualified to admit patients at 
that hospital and are knowledgeable 
about the case to order the inpatient 
admission. Therefore, we are deleting 
the proposed language in paragraph (b) 
of § 412.3 that would have required the 
order to be issued by a practitioner who 
is responsible for the inpatient care of 
the patient at the hospital. We are 
replacing this language with new 
language to specify that, although the 
ordering practitioner need not be 
responsible for the patient’s inpatient 
care, he or she must be knowledgeable 
about the patient’s hospital course, 
medical plan of care, and current 
condition. 
We are finalizing all of the other 
proposed qualifications in paragraph (b) 
of § 412.3 for the ordering practitioner. 
The final language reads, ‘‘(b) The order 
must be furnished by a qualified and 
licensed practitioner who has admitting 
privileges at the hospital as permitted 
by State law, and who is knowledgeable 
about the patient’s hospital course, 
medical plan of care, and current 
condition. The practitioner may not 
delegate the decision (order) to another 
individual who is not authorized by the 
State to admit patients, or has not been 
granted admitting privileges applicable 
to that patient by the hospital’s medical 
staff.’’ We discuss the application of 
these final policies to IRFs in section 
XI.C.2.c . of the preamble of this final 
rule. 
c. Applicability to Inpatient 
Rehabilitation Facilities (IRFs) 
We note that IRFs that are excluded 
from the IPPS and paid under the IRF 
prospective payment system (IRF PPS) 
specified in 42 CFR 412.1(a)(3) have 
certain requirements in 42 CFR 
412.622(a)(3), (a)(4), and (a)(5) that 
govern an inpatient admission to an IRF. 
These requirements specify the 
admission criteria that must be 
documented in the medical record for 
an IRF admission of a Medicare Part A 
fee-for-service beneficiary to be 
considered reasonable and necessary 
under section 1862(a)(1) of the Act. For 
example, the documentation 
requirements contained in these 
regulations specify that a 
comprehensive preadmission screening 
must be conducted and must serve as 
the basis for the initial determination of 
whether or not the patient meets the 
requirements for admission to an IRF. A 
rehabilitation physician, defined as a 
licensed physician with specialized 
training and experience in 
rehabilitation, must document that he or 
she has reviewed and concurs with the 
preadmission screening prior to the 
VerDate Mar<15>2010 21:51 Aug 16, 2013 Jkt 229001 PO 00000 Frm 00448 Fmt 4701 Sfmt 4700 E:\FR\FM\19AUR2.SGM 19AUR2bjneal on DSK2TWX8P1PROD with RULES
--- page 3 ---
50943 Federal Register / Vol. 78, No. 160 / Monday, August 19, 2013 / Rules and Regulations 
admission. However, we note that 
Chapter 1, Section 110.1.4 of the MBPM 
also specifies that, at the time each 
Medicare Part A fee-for-service patient 
is admitted to an IRF, a physician must 
generate admission orders for the 
patient’s care. 
Therefore, although the required 
physician orders discussed in section 
XI.C.2.a. of the preamble of this final 
rule apply to all inpatient hospital 
admissions, including inpatient 
admissions to an IRF, they do not 
determine the timing of an IRF 
admission, nor are they used to 
determine whether the IRF admission 
was reasonable and necessary. These 
determinations are governed by the 
requirements in §§ 412.622(a)(3), (4), 
and (5) of the regulations. To clarify 
this, we have included a provision 
under new § 412.3 in this final rule that 
the IRF requirements at § 412.622 also 
must be met in order for the IRF to be 
paid for hospital inpatient services 
under Medicare Part A. However, due to 
the aforementioned inherent differences 
in the operation of and beneficiary 
admission to IRFs, such providers are 
excluded from the 2-midnight 
admission guidelines and medical 
review instruction, as provided under 
XI.C.3. of the preamble of this final rule. 
3. Inpatient Admission Guidelines 
CMS is authorized under section 1893 
of the Act to implement the Medicare 
Integrity Program to conduct medical 
review of claims and ensure 
appropriateness of Medicare payment. 
Medicare review contractors, such as 
Medicare Administrative Contractors 
(MACs), Recovery Auditors (formerly 
known as the Recovery Audit 
Contractors, or RACs), the 
Comprehensive Error Rate Testing 
(CERT) Contractor, and other review 
contractors are hired by CMS to review 
claims on a pre-payment or post- 
payment basis to determine whether a 
claim should be paid or denied or 
whether a payment was properly made 
under Medicare payment rules. 
Following documentation reviews, 
many claim denials are made or 
improper payments identified because 
either— 
• The claim was incorrectly coded 
(for example, the provider did not 
appropriately assign the individual or 
grouper inpatient and/or outpatient 
coding for the care documented); or 
• The services were not medically 
necessary (that is, the review indicates 
that the services billed were not 
reasonable and necessary based upon 
Medicare payment policies or that the 
documentation was insufficient to 
support the medical necessity of the 
services billed). 
CMS developed the CERT program to 
calculate the annual Medicare FFS 
program improper payment rate. The 
CERT program considers any claim that 
was paid when it should have been 
denied or paid at another amount 
(including both overpayments and 
underpayments) to be an improper 
payment. Hospital claim errors are 
identified more frequently for shorter 
lengths of stay. In 2012, the CERT 
contractor found that Medicare Part A 
inpatient hospital admissions for 1-day 
stays or less had an improper payment 
rate of 36.1 percent. The improper 
payment rate decreased significantly for 
2-day or 3-day stays, which had 
improper payment rates of 13.2 percent 
and 13.1 percent, respectively. The 
improper payment rate further 
decreased to 8 percent for those 
beneficiaries who were treated as 
hospital inpatients for 4 days. 
Hospital claim errors are identified 
more frequently for shorter lengths of 
stay. The majority of improper 
payments under Medicare Part A for 
short-stay inpatient hospital claims have 
been due to inappropriate patient status 
(that is, the services furnished were 
reasonable and necessary, but should 
have been furnished on a hospital 
outpatient, rather than hospital 
inpatient, basis). Inpatient hospital 
short-stay claim errors are frequently 
related to minor surgical procedures or 
diagnostic tests. In such situations, the 
beneficiary is typically admitted as a 
hospital inpatient after the procedure is 
completed, monitored overnight as an 
inpatient, and discharged from the 
hospital in the morning. Medicare 
review contractors typically find that 
while the underlying services provided 
were reasonable and necessary, the 
inpatient hospitalization following the 
procedure was not (that is, the services 
following the procedure should have 
been provided on an outpatient basis). 
In the FY 2014 IPPS/LTCH PPS 
proposed rule (78 FR 27644 through 
27650), we sought to clarify our 
longstanding policy on how Medicare 
review contractors review inpatient 
hospital admissions for payment under 
Medicare Part A. We also issued 
proposed guidance to physicians and 
hospitals regarding when a hospital 
inpatient admission should be ordered 
for Medicare beneficiaries. In this final 
rule we discuss the public comments we 
received in response to our proposals 
relating to admission guidance and 
medical review and provide our final 
policies after considerations of those 
public comments. 
a. Correct Coding Reviews 
We did not propose any changes to 
coding review strategies for hospital 
claims. Reviewers will continue to 
ensure that the correct codes were 
applied and are supported by the 
medical record documentation. 
b. Complete and Accurate 
Documentation 
When conducting complex medical 
review, we proposed that Medicare 
review contractors would continue to 
employ clinicians to review practitioner 
documented procedures and ensure that 
they are supported by the submitted 
medical record documentation. Such 
has been the case for complex medical 
review as historically performed, and 
will continue to be the case per this 
final rule instruction. 
c. Medical Necessity Reviews 
(1) Physician Order and Certification 
In the proposed rule (78 FR 27647), 
we proposed to codify in 42 CFR 
412.46(b) the longstanding requirement 
that medical documentation must 
support the physician’s order and 
certification, as prescribed by CMS 
Ruling 93–1. Under the proposed new 
paragraph (b) titled ‘‘Physician’s order 
and certification regarding medical 
necessity,’’ CMS reiterated that ‘‘No 
presumptive weight shall be assigned to 
the physician’s order under § 412.3 or 
the physician’s certification under 
Subpart B of Part 424 of this chapter in 
determining the medical necessity of 
inpatient hospital services under section 
1862(a)(1) of the Act. A physician’s 
order and certification will be evaluated 
in the context of the evidence in the 
medical record.’’ We also stated that 
current requirements for practitioner 
documentation of services ordered and 
furnished would remain unchanged. 
That is, while the physician order and 
the physician certification are required 
for all inpatient hospital admissions in 
order for payment to be made under Part 
A, the physician order and the 
physician certification are not 
considered by CMS to be conclusive 
evidence that an inpatient hospital 
admission or service was medically 
necessary. Rather, the physician order 
and physician certification are 
considered along with other 
documentation in the medical record. 
Comment: Some commenters 
disagreed with the proposal for 
reviewing the physician order and 
certification in accord with the 
documentation in the medical record. 
Rather, the commenters suggested that 
an assumption of medical necessity for 
the inpatient stay would more 
VerDate Mar<15>2010 21:51 Aug 16, 2013 Jkt 229001 PO 00000 Frm 00449 Fmt 4701 Sfmt 4700 E:\FR\FM\19AUR2.SGM 19AUR2bjneal on DSK2TWX8P1PROD with RULES
--- page 4 ---
50944 Federal Register / Vol. 78, No. 160 / Monday, August 19, 2013 / Rules and Regulations 
appropriately stem from the physician 
order to admit to inpatient, particularly 
due its requirement for admission 
purposes. 
Response: Satisfying the requirements 
regarding the physician order and 
certification alone does not guarantee 
Medicare payment. Rather, in order for 
payment to be provided under Medicare 
Part A, the care must also be 
‘‘reasonable and necessary,’’ as specified 
under section 1862(a)(1) of the Act. In 
addition, section 1869(a) of the Act 
provides that determinations regarding 
entitlement to benefits are under the 
authority of the Secretary. As stated in 
our proposed rule, the instruction for 
reviewers to account for all 
documentation in the medical record, in 
addition to the actual order for inpatient 
admission, is consistent with statutory 
instruction and our prior policy as 
outlined in Medicare Ruling 93–1, and 
is being codified for transparency and 
consistency. 
Comment: Commenters requested that 
CMS define what constitutes ‘‘objective 
medical information,’’ which is required 
to support the order for a hospital 
inpatient admission. 
Response: We appreciate the 
commenters’ suggestions that additional 
documentation guidelines would be 
helpful. We will consider them as we 
develop implementation instructions 
and manual revisions. 
(2) Inpatient Hospital Admission 
Guidelines 
In the FY 2014 IPPS/LTCH PPS 
proposed rule (78 FR 27648), we 
indicated that longstanding Medicare 
policy has recognized that there are 
certain situations in which a hospital 
inpatient admission is rarely 
appropriate. We have stated in the 
MBPM that when a beneficiary receives 
a minor surgical procedure or other 
treatment in the hospital that is 
expected to keep him or her in the 
hospital for only a few hours (less than 
24), the services should be provided as 
outpatient hospital services, regardless 
of the hour the beneficiary comes to the 
hospital, whether he or she uses a bed, 
and whether he or she remains in the 
hospital past midnight (Section 10, 
Chapter 1 of the MBPM). In applying 
this benchmark, we have been clear that 
this instruction does not override the 
clinical judgment of the physician to 
keep the beneficiary at the hospital, to 
order specific services, or to determine 
appropriate levels of nursing care or 
physical locations within the hospital. 
Rather, this instruction provided a 
benchmark to ensure that all 
beneficiaries received consistent 
application of their Part A benefit to 
whatever clinical services were 
medically necessary. 
Due to persistently large improper 
payment rates in short-stay hospital 
inpatient claims, and in response to 
requests to provide additional guidance 
regarding the proper billing of those 
services, we proposed to modify and 
clarify our general rule and provide at 
§ 412.3(c)(1) that, in addition to services 
designated by CMS as inpatient only 
(which are appropriate for inpatient 
admission without regard to duration of 
care), surgical procedures, diagnostic 
tests, and other treatments would be 
generally appropriate for inpatient 
admission and inpatient hospital 
payment under Medicare Part A when 
the physician expects the beneficiary to 
require a stay that crosses at least 2 
midnights and admits the beneficiary to 
the hospital based upon that 
expectation. Conversely, when a 
beneficiary enters a hospital for a 
surgical procedure not specified by 
Medicare as inpatient only under 
§ 419.22(n), a diagnostic test, or any 
other treatment, and the physician 
expects to keep the beneficiary in the 
hospital for only a limited period of 
time that does not cross 2 midnights, the 
services would be generally 
inappropriate for payment under 
Medicare Part A. This would be the case 
regardless of the hour that the 
beneficiary came to the hospital or 
whether the beneficiary used a bed. 
In the proposed rule, we provided 
inpatient hospital admission guidance 
specifying that a physician or other 
qualified practitioner (herein we will 
refer to the physician, with the 
understanding that this can also pertain 
to another qualified practitioner) should 
order admission if he or she expects that 
the beneficiary’s length of stay will 
exceed a 2-midnight benchmark or if the 
beneficiary requires a procedure 
specified as inpatient-only under 
§ 419.22. We proposed that the starting 
point for this 2-midnight instruction 
would be when the beneficiary is moved 
from any outpatient area to a bed in the 
hospital in which additional hospital 
services would be provided. We also 
sought public comment regarding 
alternative methods of calculating the 
start time for the 2-midnight instruction. 
In the proposed rule, we stated that 
the judgment of the physician and the 
physician’s order for inpatient 
admission should be based on the 
expectation of care surpassing 2 
midnights, with both the expectation of 
time and the determination of the 
underlying need for medical care at the 
hospital supported by complex medical 
factors such as history and 
comorbidities, the severity of signs and 
symptoms, current medical needs, and 
the risk of an adverse event. We also 
indicated that, in accordance with 
current policy, factors that may result in 
an inconvenience to a beneficiary or 
family would not justify an inpatient 
hospital admission. The factors that lead 
a physician to admit a particular 
beneficiary based on the physician’s 
clinical expectation are significant 
clinical considerations and must be 
clearly and completely documented in 
the medical record. Because of the 
relationship that develops between a 
physician and his or her patient, the 
physician is in a unique position to 
incorporate complete medical evidence 
in a beneficiary’s medical records, and 
has ample opportunity to explain in 
detail why the expectation of the need 
for care spanning at least 2 midnights 
was appropriate in the context of that 
beneficiary’s acute condition. We stated 
in the proposed rule that a reasonable 
expectation of a stay crossing 2 
midnights, which is based on complex 
medical factors and is documented in 
the medical record, will provide the 
justification needed to support medical 
necessity of the inpatient admission, 
regardless of the actual duration of the 
hospital stay and whether it ultimately 
crosses 2 midnights. As such, we 
acknowledged in the proposed rule that 
there may be an unforeseen 
circumstance that results in a shorter 
beneficiary stay than the physician’s 
expectation of surpassing 2 midnights. 
We stated that we would expect that the 
majority of such inpatient hospital 
admissions would occur when an 
inpatient hospital admission is 
appropriately ordered, but a 
beneficiary’s transfer or death interrupts 
the beneficiary’s hospital stay that 
would have otherwise spanned at least 
2 midnights. Therefore, we provided in 
proposed § 412.3(c)(2), that ‘‘If an 
unforeseen circumstance, such as 
beneficiary death or transfer, results in 
a shorter beneficiary stay than the 
physician’s expectation of at least 2 
midnights, the patient may be 
considered to be appropriately treated 
on an inpatient basis, and the hospital 
inpatient payment may be made under 
Medicare Part A.’’ We indicated that 
documentation in the medical record of 
such a circumstance would be required 
for purposes of supporting whether the 
inpatient hospital admission was 
reasonable and necessary for Medicare 
Part A payment. In addition, we 
explained that the physician must 
certify that inpatient hospital services 
were medically necessary in accordance 
with section 1814(a) of the Act and 42 
CFR Part 424, Subpart B. 
VerDate Mar<15>2010 21:51 Aug 16, 2013 Jkt 229001 PO 00000 Frm 00450 Fmt 4701 Sfmt 4700 E:\FR\FM\19AUR2.SGM 19AUR2bjneal on DSK2TWX8P1PROD with RULES
--- page 5 ---
50945 Federal Register / Vol. 78, No. 160 / Monday, August 19, 2013 / Rules and Regulations 
Comment: Commenters pointed to 
CMS’ guidance that time should not be 
the leading factor in the decision to 
admit a beneficiary and that the 
decision should rely on the physician’s 
clinical judgment and evaluation of the 
beneficiary’s needs based on the 
severity of illness, the intensity or 
complexity of care, and the 
predictability of high-risk adverse 
outcomes. The commenters stated that 
there are many beneficiaries who stay in 
a hospital for less than 2 midnights but 
still require an inpatient level of care. 
Response: In our existing guidance, 
we stated that the decision to admit a 
patient as an inpatient is a complex 
medical decision based on many factors, 
including the risk of an adverse event 
during the period considered for 
hospitalization, and an assessment of 
the services that the beneficiary will 
need during the hospital stay. The crux 
of the medical decision is the choice to 
keep the beneficiary at the hospital in 
order to receive services or reduce risk, 
or discharge the beneficiary home 
because they may be safely treated 
through intermittent outpatient visits or 
some other care. Our previous guidance 
also provided for a 24-hour benchmark, 
instructing physicians that, in general, 
beneficiaries who need to stay at the 
hospital less than 24 hours should be 
treated as outpatients, while those 
requiring care greater than 24 hours may 
usually be treated as inpatients. Our 
proposed 2-midnight benchmark, which 
we now finalize, simply modifies our 
previous guidance to specify that the 
relevant 24 hours are those 
encompassed by 2 midnights. While the 
complex medical decision is based upon 
an assessment of the need for 
continuing treatment at the hospital, the 
2-midnight benchmark clarifies when 
beneficiaries determined to need such 
continuing treatment are generally 
appropriate for inpatient admission or 
outpatient care in the hospital. 
Contrary to the commenters’ 
suggestion, we do not refer to ‘‘level of 
care’’ in guidance regarding hospital 
inpatient admission decisions. Rather, 
we have consistently provided 
physicians with the aforementioned 
time-based admission framework to 
effectuate appropriate inpatient hospital 
admission decisions. This is supported 
by recent findings by the Office of 
Inspector General (OIG) (OIG, Hospitals’ 
Use of Observation Stays and Short 
Inpatient Stays for Medicare 
Beneficiaries, OEI–02–12–00040, July 
2013). The OIG found that the reasons 
for short inpatient stays and for 
outpatient observation stays were often 
the same. They further noted that the 
relative use of short inpatient stays 
versus outpatient observation stays 
varied widely between hospitals, 
consistent with medical review findings 
that identical beneficiaries may receive 
identical services as either inpatients or 
outpatients in different hospitals. We 
believe that this supports our proposed 
continuation of our existing policy that 
there are no prohibitions against a 
patient receiving any individual service 
as either an inpatient or an outpatient, 
except for those services designated by 
the Outpatient Prospective Payment 
System (OPPS) Inpatient-Only list as 
inpatient-only services. We further 
believe that this supports our proposed 
policy that the physician is expected to 
continue to use his or her complex 
clinical judgment in determining 
whether a beneficiary needs to stay at 
the hospital, what services and level of 
nursing care (for example, low-level, 
monitored, or one-on-one) the 
beneficiary will need, and what location 
(unit) is most appropriate. This does not 
require that the physician memorize 
complex billing or utilization 
guidelines; rather, the physician should 
generally order an inpatient admission 
when he or she has determined either 
that the beneficiary requires care at the 
hospital that is expected to transcend at 
least 2 midnights or that it will involve 
a procedure designated by the OPPS 
Inpatient-Only list as an inpatient-only 
procedure. 
Comment: Commenters asserted that 
making a time-based prediction is 
difficult for the physician. They stated 
that making such a determination is 
contradictory to medical professionals’ 
training, which is centered on the 
assessment of patients and the 
development of treatment plans, as 
opposed to focusing on the utilization 
review process. The commenters also 
stated that predicting length of stay is 
difficult because individual patients 
respond differently to care provided. 
Commenters suggested that a physician 
often does not have enough information 
about a patient at the onset of treatment 
to make an informed decision regarding 
anticipated length of stay. For example, 
a hospitalist admitting a beneficiary 
through the emergency department 
likely will not be familiar with the 
patient and may not have access to 
extensive medical history 
documentation on which to make a 
decision. Commenters suggested that 
beneficiaries with unknown or 
uncertain diagnoses should be kept 
under observation status until their 
diagnosis and course of treatment 
become clear. At that point, the 
commenters added, the hospital would 
be in the best position to determine the 
length of treatment, make the decision 
to admit to inpatient status, or discharge 
the patient home. 
Response: It has been longstanding 
Medicare policy to require physicians to 
admit a beneficiary as a hospital 
inpatient based on their expected length 
of stay. However, we recognized when 
we published our definition of 
observation services that long-term 
predictions are inherently more difficult 
than short-term predictions. Therefore, 
we revised our guidance to indicate 
that, when it was difficult to make a 
reasonable prediction, the physician 
should not admit the beneficiary but 
should place the beneficiary in 
observation as an outpatient. As new 
information becomes available, the 
physician must then reassess the 
beneficiary to determine if discharge is 
possible or if it is evident that an 
inpatient stay is required. We believe 
that this principle still applies and have 
reiterated this in the final rule. For those 
hospital stays in which the physician 
cannot reliably predict the beneficiary 
to require a hospital stay greater than 2 
midnights, the physician should 
continue to treat the beneficiary as an 
outpatient and then admit as an 
inpatient if and when additional 
information suggests a longer stay or the 
passing of the second midnight is 
anticipated. 
Comment: Commenters pointed out 
that although the proposal is framed as 
a presumption, the proposed rule, 
would, in effect, inappropriately 
establish a per se rule that inpatient 
admissions that are not expected to last 
at least 2 midnights are not medically 
reasonable and necessary (unless the 
beneficiary is receiving an inpatient- 
only service or procedure). The 
commenters stated that the proposed 
rule offers no legal or medical support 
for the idea that a 1-day stay that is 
expected to be a 1-day stay is not 
medically reasonable and necessary as 
an inpatient admission. Other 
commenters requested that CMS clarify 
that no per se rule would be created that 
inpatient payment is always 
inappropriate following procedures not 
on the inpatient-only list. 
Response: The proposed rule did not 
create a per se standard; rather, 
consistent with historical instruction, 
the proposed rule continues the use of 
a benchmark to ensure a uniform 
understanding of the circumstances 
under which an inpatient admission 
should be ordered or when the care 
should be provided on an outpatient 
basis. This common standard is not a 
per se rule but a necessary reference to 
ensure similar beneficiary cost-sharing 
and hospital reimbursement for similar 
VerDate Mar<15>2010 21:51 Aug 16, 2013 Jkt 229001 PO 00000 Frm 00451 Fmt 4701 Sfmt 4700 E:\FR\FM\19AUR2.SGM 19AUR2bjneal on DSK2TWX8P1PROD with RULES
--- page 6 ---
50946 Federal Register / Vol. 78, No. 160 / Monday, August 19, 2013 / Rules and Regulations 
care. The 2-midnight benchmark, rather, 
provides that hospital stays expected to 
last less than 2 midnights are generally 
inappropriate for inpatient hospital 
admission and Part A payment absent 
rare and unusual circumstance to be 
further detailed in sub-regulatory 
instruction. In applying this benchmark, 
we have been clear that this instruction 
does not override the clinical judgment 
of the physician to keep the beneficiary 
at the hospital, to order specific 
services, or to determine appropriate 
levels of nursing care or physical 
locations within the hospital. Rather, 
this instruction provides a benchmark to 
ensure that all beneficiaries received 
consistent application of their Part A 
benefit to whatever clinical services 
were medically necessary. 
Comment: Commenters urged CMS to 
consider situations that result in a 
shorter beneficiary stay than the 
physician’s expectation of care 
transcending 2 midnights. The 
commenters stated that in the proposed 
rule, CMS indicated that it would 
expect that the majority of such cases to 
be due to beneficiary death or transfer. 
Commenters expressed concern that 
these exceptions are too restrictive and 
urged CMS to recognize other 
exceptions, such as when a beneficiary 
leaves against medical advice (AMA) 
before reaching the 2-midnight 
benchmark, when the beneficiary 
improves more rapidly than expected, 
or when the beneficiary requires care in 
the intensive care unit (ICU). One 
commenter inquired whether a 
beneficiary who receives intensive 
services and expires prior to crossing 2 
midnights would automatically be 
classified as appropriately outpatient. 
Response: We appreciate industry 
feedback, and believe the rule, as 
finalized, provides for sufficient 
flexibility because of its basis in the 
physician’s expectation of a 2-midnight 
stay. Such would include situations in 
which the beneficiary improves more 
rapidly than the physician’s reasonable, 
documented expectation. Such 
unexpected improvement may be 
provided and billed as inpatient care, as 
the regulation is framed upon a 
reasonable and supportable expectation, 
not the actual length of care, in defining 
when hospital care is appropriate for 
inpatient payment. We do not believe 
beneficiaries treated in an intensive care 
unit should be an exception to this 
standard, as our 2-midnight benchmark 
policy is not contingent on the level of 
care required or the placement of the 
beneficiary within the hospital. In 
addition, while we did not specify the 
situation in which a beneficiary leaves 
AMA as an exception under the 
proposed rule, we acknowledge that an 
AMA departure is usually an 
unexpected event and that an inpatient 
admission could still be appropriate 
provided that the medical record 
demonstrates a reasonable expectation 
of a 2-midnight stay when the 
admission order is written. As we 
develop our manual guidance to 
implement this proposed rule, we will 
identify those unusual situations in 
which we expect that the 2 midnight 
benchmark does not apply. 
Comment: Commenters voiced 
concerns that the use of observation 
would increase under the proposed 
policy, regardless of CMS’ intent to 
reduce the incidence of long observation 
stays. Some commenters believed that if 
the physician would have to predict a 
greater than 2 midnight stay, only the 
sickest individuals and those receiving 
procedures on the inpatient-only list 
would be admitted as inpatients, while 
many more beneficiaries would be 
placed in observation so as to avoid an 
inaccurate length of stay determination 
and subsequent short-stay audits. Other 
commenters believed that because an 
increase in observation stays will 
happen, many hospital stays that would 
generally be appropriate for an inpatient 
admission under CMS’ current 24-hour 
guidance would now be generally 
inappropriate for Part A payment unless 
the 2-midnight benchmark is met. 
Commenters voiced concern that the 
increase in observation will lead to a 
strain in outpatient beds and resources, 
leading the hospitals to use inpatient 
beds for beneficiaries in outpatient 
status who need more intense 
monitoring than is currently available in 
outpatient areas without a proportionate 
increase in outpatient reimbursement 
from Medicare. Commenters also urged 
CMS to recalibrate its outpatient 
payment so that hospitals will be 
adequately compensated for handling 
the increase in observation cases, 
particularly for those stays requiring 
complex monitoring and intervention. 
The commenters believed that as 
beneficiaries have the potential for 
greater cost-sharing for an observation 
stay than an inpatient stay, this may 
lead to greater financial liability for 
beneficiaries. 
Response: While previous guidance 
provided a 24-hour benchmark to be 
used in making inpatient admission 
decisions, we now specify that the 24 
hours relevant to inpatient admission 
decisions are those encapsulated by 2 
midnights. As we provide in this final 
rule, we expect that the decision to 
admit the beneficiary should be based 
on the cumulative time spent at the 
hospital beginning with the initial 
outpatient service. In other words, if the 
physician makes the decision to admit 
after the beneficiary arrived at the 
hospital and began receiving services, 
he or she should consider the time 
already spent receiving those services in 
estimating the beneficiary’s total 
expected length of stay. For example, if 
the beneficiary has already passed 1 
midnight as an outpatient observation 
patient or in routine recovery following 
outpatient surgery, the physician should 
consider the 2 midnight benchmark met 
if he or she expects the beneficiary to 
require an additional midnight in the 
hospital. This means that the decision to 
admit becomes easier as the time 
approaches the second midnight, and 
beneficiaries in medically necessary 
hospitalizations should not pass a 
second midnight prior to the admission 
order being written. The potential 
increase in very short (less than 2 
midnights) observation stays should be 
balanced by a significant decrease in 
long (2 midnights or more) observation 
stays. Because we expect that this 
revision should virtually eliminate the 
use of extended observation, we also 
anticipate it will concurrently limit 
beneficiary cost-sharing for outpatient 
services. We are not expecting any 
change in the utilization of specific beds 
or facilities, as the expectation of the 
duration of needed care is independent 
of the beneficiary’s location at the 
hospital. 
Comment: One commenter inquired 
about the appropriate use of Condition 
Code 44 in a situation when the 
physician expected a stay that met the 
2-midnight standard but the beneficiary 
experienced an unanticipated recovery. 
Response: We refer commenters to the 
instruction provided at section XI.B. of 
the preamble of this rule, in which we 
expanded on Condition Code 44 
requirements and application. Under 
this section, we state that providers may 
continue to change patient status to 
outpatient during the hospital stay upon 
meeting the Condition Code 44 
requirements. However, we note that 
Condition Code 44 is not to be used for 
unexpected events because, as described 
above, those situations can remain 
appropriately inpatient. Thus, a 
beneficiary who experiences an 
unexpected recovery during a medically 
necessary stay should not be converted 
to an outpatient but should remain an 
inpatient if the 2-midnight expectation 
was reasonable at the time the inpatient 
order was written, but unexpectedly the 
stay did not fully transpire. In contrast, 
Condition Code 44 is specifically for the 
situation when the utilization review or 
management committee determines that 
the physician has not appropriately 
VerDate Mar<15>2010 21:51 Aug 16, 2013 Jkt 229001 PO 00000 Frm 00452 Fmt 4701 Sfmt 4700 E:\FR\FM\19AUR2.SGM 19AUR2bjneal on DSK2TWX8P1PROD with RULES
--- page 7 ---
50947 Federal Register / Vol. 78, No. 160 / Monday, August 19, 2013 / Rules and Regulations 
admitted a patient and the physician 
concurs that the status should be 
converted to outpatient prior to 
beneficiary discharge. 
Comment: Commenters indicated that 
inpatient-only procedures that require a 
1-day length of stay would be affected 
by this proposed policy and may not be 
adequately reimbursed under Medicare 
Part B. The commenters requested that 
CMS specify that all services on the 
inpatient-only list should automatically 
be deemed to meet inpatient service 
criteria, even if the beneficiary is in the 
hospital for less than 2 midnights. 
Conversely, another commenter 
suggested that excluding inpatient-only 
procedures, which may or may not 
require 2-midnight stays, contradicts a 
time-based policy. 
Response: In the proposed rule, we 
stated that procedures on the OPPS 
inpatient-only list are always 
appropriately inpatient, regardless of 
the actual time expected at the hospital, 
so long as the procedure is medically 
necessary and performed pursuant to a 
physician order and formal admission. 
Procedures designated as inpatient-only 
are deemed statutorily appropriate for 
inpatient payment at § 419.22(n). As 
such, we believe that inpatient-only 
procedures are appropriate for exclusion 
from the 2-midnight benchmark. Under 
this final rule, inpatient-only 
procedures currently performed as 
inpatient 1-day procedures will 
continue to be provided as inpatient 1- 
day procedures, and therefore this rule 
will not result in any change in status 
or reimbursement. 
Comment: Commenters recommended 
that CMS remove the 2-midnight 
guidance for certain procedures, 
allowing physicians to continue 
admitting as inpatient high risk, 
complex beneficiaries who are to 
undergo a surgery with added 
complexity, regardless of the expected 
length of stay. The commenters stated 
that many Medicare beneficiaries have 
multiple comorbidities, and the 
execution of seemingly simple 
procedures may require more pre-, intra- 
, and post-operative services than would 
be necessary for younger or healthier 
patients, even when there is no 
expectation that the beneficiary will 
require a stay of at least 2 midnights. 
Commenters added that the provision of 
such services may exceed the level of 
care typically associated with 
observation care. Other commenters 
suggested that CMS explicitly preclude 
from further review any services that are 
not typically available in an outpatient 
setting, such as telemetry. 
Response: We agree with commenters 
that factors such as the procedures being 
performed and the health status of the 
beneficiary are important considerations 
in the decision to keep the beneficiary 
in the hospital. However, as we note 
above, the beneficiary’s required ‘‘level 
of care’’ is not part of the guidance 
regarding hospital inpatient admission 
decisions. Rather, we provide 
physicians with a 2-midnight admission 
framework to effectuate appropriate 
inpatient hospital admission decisions. 
More specifically, we have stipulated 
that factors such as the procedures being 
performed and the beneficiary’s 
condition and comorbidities apply 
when the physician formulates his or 
her expectation regarding the need for 
hospital care, while the decision of 
whether to admit a beneficiary as an 
inpatient or keep as an outpatient is 
based upon the physician’s expectation 
of the beneficiary’s required length of 
stay. In this rule, we have not identified 
any circumstances where the 2- 
midnight benchmark restricts the 
physician to a specific pattern of care, 
as we have specified that the 2-midnight 
benchmark, like the previous 24-hour 
benchmark, does not prevent the 
physician from providing any service at 
any hospital regardless of the expected 
duration of the service. Rather, this 
policy provides guidance on when the 
hospitalized beneficiary is appropriate 
for coverage under Part A benefits as an 
inpatient, and when the hospitalized 
beneficiary should receive that 
treatment as a registered outpatient 
subject to Part B benefits. On the other 
hand, we also specify that certain 
procedures may have intrinsic risks, 
recovery impacts or complexities that 
would cause them to be appropriate for 
inpatient coverage under Part A 
regardless of the expected length of 
hospital time a specific physician 
expects a particular patient to require. 
We believe that the OPPS Inpatient- 
Only List identifies those procedures 
and we have proposed that this is a 
specific exception to the generally 
applicable 2 midnight benchmark. We 
may also specify other potential 
exceptions to the generally applicable 
benchmark as we revise our manuals to 
implement this proposed rule. 
Comment: Commenters recommended 
that the risk of an adverse event as being 
a determinant in the inpatient 
admission decision should be removed, 
qualified as ‘‘high’’ or ‘‘unreasonable,’’ 
or narrowly defined to only include 
risks during the beneficiary’s course of 
treatment that can be addressed or 
managed by the hospital. The 
commenters pointed to past trends of 
inconsistency in the use of risk as a 
factor in the inpatient admission 
decision by hospitals and appeal 
entities. Commenters suggested that, at 
most, the beneficiary’s risk of morbidity 
or mortality should be a factor 
considered when making the decision of 
whether the keep the beneficiary in the 
hospital or send the beneficiary home, 
not when determining the appropriate 
patient status as inpatient or outpatient. 
Response: We believe that, due to the 
nature of the Medicare population, 
coexisting or concurrent medical 
conditions are a frequent occurrence. As 
a result, admission decisions centered 
around risk must relate to current 
disease processes or presenting 
symptoms, and not merely be part of the 
beneficiary’s benign or latent past 
medical history. We note that ‘‘risk’’ in 
common usage describes an 
unacceptable probability of an adverse 
outcome, as in ‘‘risky behavior.’’ We 
reiterate our stance that the decision to 
hospitalize a beneficiary is a complex 
medical decision made by the physician 
in consideration of various risk factors, 
including the beneficiary’s age, disease 
processes, comorbidities, and the 
potential impact of sending the 
beneficiary home. It is up to the 
physician to make the complex medical 
decision of whether the beneficiary’s 
risk of morbidity or mortality dictates 
the need to remain at the hospital 
because the risk of an adverse event 
would otherwise be unacceptable under 
reasonable standards of care, or when 
the beneficiary may be discharged 
home. If the resultant length of stay for 
medically necessary hospitalization is 
expected to surpass 2 midnights, the 
physician should admit the patient as 
an inpatient. 
Comment: Commenters pointed out 
that the complexity of caring for the 
elderly beneficiary and the limited 
access to resources in the community 
continues to be challenging. While a 
beneficiary may not meet the screening 
criteria for an inpatient admission, the 
beneficiary’s complex needs and lack of 
access to medical therapies outside the 
hospital require the admitting physician 
to make a judgment as to whether such 
patients are in greater danger of serious 
illness or death if they are discharged 
than if they are admitted, and may 
result in the hospital being unable to 
release a beneficiary into the 
community. Conversely, a commenter 
wanted to remind CMS that 
convenience factors or nonmedically 
necessary care violate the Social 
Security Act, which excludes custodial 
care from Medicare coverage. 
Response: While we will not dictate 
the hospital or physician admission 
decision, we also note that Medicare is 
statutorily prohibited under section 
VerDate Mar<15>2010 21:51 Aug 16, 2013 Jkt 229001 PO 00000 Frm 00453 Fmt 4701 Sfmt 4700 E:\FR\FM\19AUR2.SGM 19AUR2bjneal on DSK2TWX8P1PROD with RULES
--- page 8 ---
50948 Federal Register / Vol. 78, No. 160 / Monday, August 19, 2013 / Rules and Regulations 
1862(a)(1)(A) of the Act from paying for 
services that are not reasonable and 
necessary. Therefore, we have identified 
so-called ‘‘social admissions’’ and 
admissions to avoid inconvenience as 
inappropriate from Medicare payment 
per the aforementioned statutory 
exclusion. This is consistent with 
current manual instructions. We will 
look for opportunities to offer additional 
guidance addressing these types of 
medical necessity decisions as we 
update our policy manuals. 
Comment: Commenters requested that 
CMS provide clarification for how 
hospitals receiving beneficiaries from 
another hospital should make the 
admission decision under the proposed 
policy. 
Response: We recognize that, in 
addition to the occurrence of 
unexpected transfers out of a hospital, 
there are a number of possible scenarios 
involving transfers into a hospital that 
that may impact the length of stay 
determination under this policy. We 
noted in the proposed rule that an 
unexpected transfer out of the sending 
hospital is one reason why an inpatient 
stay that lasts less than 2 midnights may 
still be appropriately inpatient. Due to 
the complexity of the possible transfer 
scenarios, we believe that explicit 
guidance should be reserved for manual 
instruction. Drafting these instructions 
will be one of the highest priorities as 
we develop our implementation 
instructions. 
Comment: Commenters pointed out 
that, under this proposal, the distinction 
between inpatient and outpatient may 
come down to small time discrepancies. 
For example, a beneficiary whose 
hospital stay begins shortly before 
midnight and lasts just over 48 hours 
will be considered an inpatient because 
the stay will cross 2 midnights, while a 
beneficiary whose hospital stay begins 
shortly after midnight and lasts just 
under 48 hours will be considered an 
outpatient because the stay will only 
cross 1 midnight. 
Response: The application of 2 
midnights was proposed for the purpose 
of providing both consistency and 
clarity. We have expected and continue 
to expect that physicians will make the 
decision to keep a beneficiary in the 
hospital when clinically warranted and 
will order all appropriate treatments 
and care in the appropriate location 
based on the beneficiary’s individual 
medical needs. We also expect that 
physicians will apply the revised 
benchmark as they have previously 
applied the existing benchmark, 
providing any medically necessary 
services in an inpatient status whenever 
the benchmark is met and in all other 
instances providing identical services to 
patients staying at the hospital in a day 
or overnight outpatient status. While we 
have historically referenced a 24-hour 
benchmark, we now specify that the 24 
hours relevant to inpatient admission 
decisions are those encapsulated by 2 
midnights. This distinction is consistent 
with our application of Medicare 
utilization days, which are based on the 
number of midnights crossed. Medicare 
charges beneficiaries for utilization days 
and pays hospitals for utilization days 
when it applies per diem adjustments, 
such as the transfer adjustment. A 
beneficiary who is admitted just before 
midnight and discharged 36 hours later 
is currently charged 2 utilization days, 
while a beneficiary admitted just after 
midnight is charged 1 day. In addition, 
the use of 2 midnights is an easy 
concept for beneficiaries to understand 
in assessing the appropriateness of their 
assigned status, associated coverage, 
and impacts. 
Comment: Commenters provided 
alternate proposals for guiding inpatient 
admissions and medical review. Some 
commenters suggested that physicians 
are not apprised of admission criteria, 
but rather the medical treatment 
necessary for the beneficiary, and 
suggested that case management be 
permitted to make inpatient admission 
determinations, which could be 
concurred or nonconcurred to by the 
treating physician. Conversely, other 
commenters believed the physician was 
most apprised of the patient condition 
and, therefore, the need for inpatient 
admission or care spanning 2 midnights. 
As such, some commenters believed the 
physician order should trigger a 
presumption of appropriate payment for 
medical review purposes. One 
commenter suggested good faith 
protections for facilities in strict 
adherence to their hospital comprised 
utilization review plan. Another 
commenter disagreed with the need for 
any change to the current medical 
review policy. 
Response: In the proposed rule, we 
focused on clarifying and modifying the 
distinction between hospitalization as 
an outpatient and hospitalization as an 
inpatient. While the proposed approach 
arose out of significant consideration for 
provider impact, ease in 
implementation and operationalization, 
we will assess commenter feedback 
falling within the scope of CMS’ policy 
in implementing changes to our manual 
provisions. 
Comment: Commenters requested 
further guidance to clarify what criteria 
support a reasonable and necessary 
inpatient admission. The commenters’ 
suggested sources of such guidance 
included evidence-based guidelines 
offered through the Agency for 
Healthcare Research and Quality 
(AHRQ) National Guidelines 
Clearinghouse and the various medical 
specialty societies and commercial 
hospital screening guidelines. Some 
commenters also suggested that 
inpatient admissions be deemed 
reasonable and necessary based on the 
use of such sources. Another commenter 
indicated that a time-based policy 
contradicts CMS instructions contained 
in the Program Integrity Manual 
pertaining to the use of screening tools 
as part of the review of inpatient 
hospital claims. Regardless of the 
criteria chosen, commenters iterated 
that CMS and its contractors must 
update existing inpatient admission 
guidance and policies to ensure 
consistency in application by all 
Medicare review contractors. 
Commenters also inquired whether 
providers would have the opportunity 
to comment on any additional guidance 
that will be created to implement this 
rule. 
Response: Medicare review 
contractors must abide by CMS policies 
in conducting payment determinations, 
but are permitted to take into account 
evidence-based guidelines or 
commercial utilization tools that may 
aid such a decision. We also 
acknowledge that this type of 
information may be appropriately 
considered by the physician as part of 
the complex medical judgment that 
guides his or her decision to keep a 
beneficiary in the hospital and 
formulation of the expected length of 
stay. As we update our manuals and 
take additional steps to implement this 
rule, we anticipate using our usual 
processes to develop and release 
subregulatory guidance such as manual 
instructions and educational materials, 
which may include open door forums, 
regional meetings, correspondence and 
other ongoing interactions with 
stakeholders; and that our contractors 
will continue to involve local entities as 
they implement these rules. 
Comment: Several commenters 
indicated that CMS should delay 
enforcement of the revised admissions 
criteria until a time after October 1, 
2013, due to the significant system 
changes and educational efforts that will 
be required. Some commenters 
indicated that CMS should use this 
delay in order to conduct further 
research and collaborate with providers, 
while others suggested that CMS 
conduct a thorough analysis of current 
payment policy and planned payment 
reforms that could affect inpatient 
admission decisions, including those 
VerDate Mar<15>2010 21:51 Aug 16, 2013 Jkt 229001 PO 00000 Frm 00454 Fmt 4701 Sfmt 4700 E:\FR\FM\19AUR2.SGM 19AUR2bjneal on DSK2TWX8P1PROD with RULES
--- page 9 ---
50949 Federal Register / Vol. 78, No. 160 / Monday, August 19, 2013 / Rules and Regulations 
with implications for patient safety, 
quality, and beneficiary cost-sharing, 
before finalizing its guidance. Other 
commenters suggested that claim 
reviews for inpatient stays of greater 
than 2 midnights should continue 
without evidence of gaming for a period 
of time following implementation of the 
new policy to ensure that hospitals are 
properly billing under the revised 
criteria. The commenters stated that 
after that time has passed, reviews of 
inpatient stays longer than 2 midnights 
would be based on evidence of 
overutilization. 
Response: We proposed only a change 
in the inpatient admissions benchmark 
from an hourly expectation (24 hours) to 
a daily (2-midnights) expectation. We 
do not believe that delays in 
implementation are necessary or 
desirable, and we expect, through 
collaboration with stakeholders, to 
develop additional guidance and 
instruction as part of that 
implementation. 
Comment: Commenters questioned 
the applicability of the proposed rule to 
differing types of hospital facilities. 
Commenters specifically requested 
clarity regarding application of the rule 
to IRFs and IPFs. Commenters further 
asserted that this distinction may 
conflict with State laws requiring 
inpatient admissions post 24 hours, and 
such States should be granted 
exception. 
Response: In the proposed rule, our 
reference to section 1861(e) of the Act 
was intended to specify that CAHs were 
included in the proposed policies, not 
that we were proposing that IPFs or 
other non-IPPS hospitals should be 
excluded. Having considered the public 
comments to the proposed rule, we 
believe that all hospitals, LTCHs, and 
CAHs, with the exception of IRFs, 
would appropriately be included in our 
final policies regarding the 2-midnight 
admission guidance and medical review 
criteria for determining the general 
appropriateness of inpatient admission 
and Part A payment. Due to the inherent 
differences in the operation of and 
beneficiary admissions to IRFs, such 
providers must be excluded from the 
aforementioned admission guidelines 
and medical review instruction. We 
disagree with the commenters’ assertion 
that the 2-midnight admission and 
medical review policies conflict with 
existing state laws regarding 
observation. The 2-midnight benchmark 
does not prohibit physicians from 
ordering inpatient admission in 
accordance with state law; rather, this 
policy indicates when Medicare 
payment will be deemed appropriate. 
To the extent that State law requires 
admission in situations where Medicare 
payment would not be appropriate, 
providers should work with their States 
to resolve those discrepancies. 
Comment: Commenters indicated that 
the proposed policy, which clarifies 
when a beneficiary becomes an 
inpatient, promotes the integrity and 
accuracy of the 340B program. They 
stated that the 340B program creates an 
incentive for hospitals to keep 
beneficiaries in observation status for 
the purpose of obtaining the deeply 
discounted 340B acquisition price that 
would otherwise by unavailable. Thus, 
they added, the 340B spread creates a 
financial incentive for 340B hospitals to 
keep beneficiaries in outpatient/ 
observation status for the sole purpose 
of administering drugs. 
Response: We appreciate the 
observation of the commenters and 
concur that this policy promotes 
consistent application of an inpatient 
status to all stakeholders. 
(3) Medical Review of Inpatient Hospital 
Admissions Under Part A 
Under this revised policy, services 
designated by the OPPS Inpatient-Only 
list as inpatient-only, would continue to 
be appropriate for inpatient hospital 
admission and payment under Medicare 
Part A. In addition, surgical procedures, 
diagnostic tests, and other treatments 
would be generally deemed appropriate 
for inpatient hospital admission and 
payment under Medicare Part A when 
the physician expects the patient to 
require a stay that crosses at least 2 
midnights and admits the patient to the 
hospital based upon that expectation. 
We proposed, and are now finalizing, 
two distinct, though related, medical 
review policies, a 2-midnight 
presumption and a 2-midnight 
benchmark. Under the 2-midnight 
presumption, inpatient hospital claims 
with lengths of stay greater than 2 
midnights after the formal admission 
following the order will be presumed 
generally appropriate for Part A 
payment and will not be the focus of 
medical review efforts absent evidence 
of systematic gaming, abuse or delays in 
the provision of care in an attempt to 
qualify for the 2-midnight presumption 
(that is, inpatient hospital admissions 
where medically necessary treatment 
was not provided on a continuous basis 
throughout the hospital stay and the 
services could have been furnished in a 
shorter timeframe). Beneficiaries should 
not be held in the hospital absent 
medically necessary care for the 
purpose of meeting the 2-midnight 
benchmark. Review contractors will also 
continue to assess claims in which the 
beneficiary span of care after admission 
crosses 2 midnights: 
• To ensure the services provided 
were medically necessary; 
• To ensure that the stay at the 
hospital was medically necessary; 
• To validate provider coding and 
documentation as reflective of the 
medical evidence; 
• When the CERT Contractor is 
directed to do so under the Improper 
Payments Elimination and Recovery 
Improvement Act of 2012 (Pub. L. 112– 
248); or 
• If directed by CMS or other 
authoritative governmental entity 
(including but not limited to the HHS 
Office of Inspector General and 
Government Accountability Office). 
Conversely, under this revised policy, 
CMS’ medical review efforts will focus 
on inpatient hospital admissions with 
lengths of stay crossing only 1 midnight 
or less after admission (that is, only 1 
Medicare utilization day, as defined in 
42 CFR 409.61 and implemented in the 
MBPM, Chapter 3, Section 20.1). As 
previously described, such claims have 
traditionally demonstrated the largest 
proportion of inpatient hospital 
improper payments under Medicare Part 
A. If the physician admits the 
beneficiary as an inpatient but the 
beneficiary is in the hospital for less 
than 2 midnights after the order is 
written, CMS and its medical review 
contractors will not presume that the 
inpatient hospital status was reasonable 
and necessary for payment purposes, 
but may instead evaluate the claim 
pursuant to the 2-midnight benchmark. 
Medicare review contractors will (a) 
evaluate the physician order for 
inpatient admission to the hospital, 
along with the other required elements 
of the physician certification, (b) the 
medical documentation supporting the 
expectation that care would span at 
least 2 midnights, and (c) the medical 
documentation supporting a decision 
that it was reasonable and necessary to 
keep the patient at the hospital to 
receive such care, in order to determine 
whether payment under Part A is 
appropriate. 
In their review of the medical record, 
Medicare review contractors will 
consider complex medical factors that 
support a reasonable expectation of the 
needed duration of the stay relative to 
the 2-midnight benchmark. Both the 
decision to keep the beneficiary at the 
hospital and the expectation of needed 
duration of the stay are based on such 
complex medical factors as beneficiary 
medical history and comorbidities, the 
severity of signs and symptoms, current 
medical needs, and the risk (probability) 
of an adverse event occurring during the 
VerDate Mar<15>2010 21:51 Aug 16, 2013 Jkt 229001 PO 00000 Frm 00455 Fmt 4701 Sfmt 4700 E:\FR\FM\19AUR2.SGM 19AUR2bjneal on DSK2TWX8P1PROD with RULES
--- page 10 ---
50950 Federal Register / Vol. 78, No. 160 / Monday, August 19, 2013 / Rules and Regulations 
time period for which hospitalization is 
considered. In other words, if it was 
reasonable for the physician to expect 
the beneficiary to require a stay lasting 
2 midnights, and that expectation is 
documented in the medical record, 
inpatient admission is generally 
appropriate, and payment may be made 
under Medicare Part A; this is regardless 
of whether the anticipated length of stay 
did not transpire due to unforeseen 
circumstances such as beneficiary death 
or transfer (so long as the physician’s 
order and certification requirements 
also are met). As discussed above, an 
inpatient admission is appropriate and 
Part A payment may also be made in the 
case of services on Medicare’s inpatient- 
only list, regardless of the expected 
length of stay. 
Comment: Some commenters shared 
concerns regarding the proposed 
method of calculating the length of stay 
for purposes of the 2-midnight 
benchmark, beginning when the 
beneficiary is moved from any 
outpatient area to a bed in the hospital 
in which the additional hospital 
services will be provided. Commenters 
noted that hospital capacity issues can 
lead to situations in which a beneficiary 
is boarded in the emergency department 
until a bed becomes available, which 
can be hours after the admission order 
is written. In other instances, the 
commenters added, an inpatient 
admission may be planned after a 
surgical procedure and the beneficiary 
becomes an inpatient when he or she 
reports to the operating room for 
preoperative assessment and 
preparation. Commenters pointed out 
that if the clock does not start until 
beneficiary movement to another area of 
the hospital occurs, the beneficiary may 
not meet the 2-midnight benchmark 
although he or she was receiving 
treatment in the hospital for greater than 
2 midnights. Commenters provided 
various alternate suggestions for when 
the clock should start. Many 
commenters suggested that CMS start 
the clock the earliest of: (1) When the 
physician writes an order for admission 
or observation; (2) when the beneficiary 
is treated in the emergency department; 
or (3) when the beneficiary is placed in 
a bed for observation. Other commenters 
suggested that the clock should begin 
when the beneficiary meets inpatient 
admission criteria or when the nursing 
intake notes specify the time the 
beneficiary is admitted to the floor and 
is put in a bed. Regardless of the 
decision CMS made on this point, 
commenters requested that clarification 
be provided on when the inpatient order 
should be written and how the time 
should be counted for medical review 
purposes. 
Response: We agree with the concerns 
noted by commenters, and are revising 
the proposed rule accordingly. In this 
final rule, we specify that the ordering 
physician may consider time the 
beneficiary spent receiving outpatient 
services (including observation services, 
treatments in the emergency 
department, and procedures provided in 
the operating room or other treatment 
area) for purposes of determining 
whether the 2-midnight benchmark is 
expected to be met and therefore 
inpatient admission is generally 
appropriate. For beneficiaries who do 
not arrive through the emergency 
department or are directly receiving 
inpatient services (for example, 
inpatient admission order written prior 
to admission for an elective admission 
or transfer from another hospital), the 
starting point for medical review 
purposes will be from the time the 
patient starts receiving any services after 
arrival at the hospital. We emphasize 
that the time the beneficiary spent as an 
outpatient before the inpatient 
admission order is written will not be 
considered inpatient time, but may be 
considered by physicians in 
determining whether a patient should 
be admitted as an inpatient, and during 
the medical review process for the 
limited purpose of determining whether 
the 2-midnight benchmark was met and 
therefore payment is generally 
appropriate under Part A. Claims in 
which a medically necessary inpatient 
stay spans at least 2 midnights after the 
beneficiary is formally admitted as an 
inpatient will be presumed appropriate 
for inpatient admission and inpatient 
hospital payment and will generally not 
be subject to medical review of the 
inpatient admission, absent evidence of 
systematic gaming, abuse, or delays in 
the provision of care in an attempt to 
qualify for the 2-midnight presumption. 
Comment: Commenters requested 
clarification regarding the distinction 
between inpatient time and outpatient 
time for purposes of meeting the 2- 
midnight benchmark, specifically for 
those beneficiaries who are first treated 
in observation status and then later as 
hospital inpatients pursuant to a 
physician’s order. Commenters 
recommended that CMS consider 
observation care to count toward the 2- 
midnight rule when complications arise 
that lead to previously unanticipated 
extended care in accord with 
requirements for skilled nursing facility 
eligibility. 
Response: As noted above, we will 
allow the physician to consider time 
spent in the hospital as an outpatient in 
making their inpatient admission 
decision. This is consistent with CMS 
existing instructions and medical 
review guidance, which allow 
physicians and Medicare review 
contractors to account for the 
beneficiary’s medical history and 
physical condition prior to the inpatient 
admission decision. Therefore, if upon 
beneficiary presentation, the physician 
is unable to make an evaluation and 
corresponding expected length of stay 
determination, the physician may first 
monitor the beneficiary in observation 
or continue to perform diagnostics in 
the outpatient arena. If the beneficiary’s 
medical needs and condition after 1 
midnight in outpatient status dictate the 
need for an additional midnight within 
the hospital receiving medically 
necessary care, the physician may 
consider the care in the outpatient 
setting when making his or her 
admission decision. Medicare review 
contractors would similarly apply the 2- 
midnight benchmark to all time spent 
within the hospital receiving medically 
necessary services in their claim 
evaluation. 
We reiterate that the physician order, 
the remaining elements of the physician 
certification, and formal inpatient 
admission remain the mandated means 
of inpatient admission. While outpatient 
time may be accounted for in 
application of the 2-midnight 
benchmark, it may not be retroactively 
included as inpatient care for skilled 
nursing care eligibility or other benefit 
purposes. Inpatient status begins with 
the admission based on a physician 
order. 
Comment: Commenters expressed 
concern about the additional scrutiny 
that 1-day inpatient hospital stays 
would undergo under this policy. 
Commenters also were particularly 
interested in how the review contractors 
would review inpatient stays that lasted 
less than 2 midnights, including 
whether current review criteria would 
continue to be utilized for such reviews. 
The commenters requested that CMS 
define situations in which a hospital 
stay lasting less than 2 midnights would 
properly qualify as inpatient. 
Response: If the physician admits the 
beneficiary as an inpatient but the 
beneficiary is in the hospital for less 
than 2 midnights after the admission 
begins, CMS and the Medicare review 
contractors will not presume that the 
inpatient hospital admission was 
reasonable and necessary for payment 
purposes, but will apply the 2-midnight 
benchmark in conducting medical 
review. In making their determination of 
whether the inpatient admission is 
appropriate, Medicare review 
VerDate Mar<15>2010 21:51 Aug 16, 2013 Jkt 229001 PO 00000 Frm 00456 Fmt 4701 Sfmt 4700 E:\FR\FM\19AUR2.SGM 19AUR2bjneal on DSK2TWX8P1PROD with RULES
--- page 11 ---
50951 Federal Register / Vol. 78, No. 160 / Monday, August 19, 2013 / Rules and Regulations 
contractors will evaluate: (a) The 
physician order for inpatient admission 
to the hospital, along with the other 
required elements of the physician 
certification; (b) the medical 
documentation supporting that the 
order was based on an expectation of 
need for care spanning at least 2 
midnights; and (c) the medical 
documentation supporting a decision 
that it was reasonable and necessary to 
keep the patient at the hospital to 
receive such care. In their review of the 
medical record, Medicare review 
contractors will consider complex 
medical factors that support a 
reasonable expectation of the needed 
duration of the stay relative to the 2- 
midnight benchmark. These include 
such factors as beneficiary medical 
history and comorbidities, the severity 
of signs and symptoms, current medical 
needs, and the risk of an adverse event. 
Comment: Commenters asserted that 
the proposed rule penalizes efficiency, 
as those hospitals that are able to treat 
beneficiaries in less than 2 midnights 
will be able to admit fewer beneficiaries 
than those less efficient hospitals who 
do not have the same resources. Other 
commenters expressed concern that the 
new proposed policy would encourage 
hospitals to hold beneficiaries in the 
hospital solely for the purpose of 
meeting the 2-midnight presumption 
and avoid audits of their claims. The 
commenters stated that consequences of 
such practices on the beneficiaries 
could include prolonged exposure to 
additional medical risks and would also 
lead to increased costs to the Medicare 
program, due to medically unnecessary 
time in the hospital. Conversely, some 
commenters indicated that they did not 
believe that hospitals would not hold 
patients for longer than necessary to 
meet inpatient requirements. 
Response: We have noted that the 
decision to admit is based on an 
expectation of medically necessary care 
transcending 2 midnights resulting from 
the practitioner’s consideration of the 
beneficiary’s condition and medical 
needs. We will monitor all hospitals for 
intentional or unwarranted delays in the 
provision of care, which may result in 
increased inpatient admissions 
secondary to the 2 midnight instruction. 
We are also cognizant of concerns 
related to unnecessarily elongated 
hospital admissions, and will be 
monitoring for such patterns of systemic 
delays indicative of fraud or abuse. If a 
hospital is unnecessarily holding 
beneficiaries to qualify for the 2- 
midnight presumption, CMS and/or its 
contractors may conduct review on any 
of its inpatient claims, including those 
which surpassed 2 midnights after 
admission. 
Comment: One commenter stated that 
while it is reasonable that a medically 
necessary hospital stay crossing 2 
midnights may be appropriately billed 
as inpatient, there should be no 
presumption that such a 2-midnight stay 
was itself medically necessary simply 
because a patient was in the hospital 2 
consecutive nights. The commenter 
stated that the proposed rule includes a 
requirement that review will only be 
permitted when the error rate is 
sufficient to warrant auditing activity; 
however, the audit that would establish 
this error would itself be precluded 
under CMS’ presumption. The 
commenter stated that, alternatively, 
data analysis of the claims should 
remain the foundation for selection of 
claims for medical record review to 
determine whether the documentation 
supports the claim as billed. The 
commenter believed that a presumption 
of medical necessity based on the time 
a beneficiary stays in the hospital places 
the Medicare trust fund and taxpayers at 
risk. 
Response: We note that it was not our 
intent to suggest that a 2-midnight stay 
was presumptive evidence that the stay 
at the hospital was necessary; rather, 
only that if the stay was necessary, it 
was appropriately provided as an 
inpatient stay. We have discussed in 
response to other comments that, in 
accordance with our statutory 
obligations, some medical review is 
always necessary to ensure that services 
provided are reasonable and necessary, 
and that we will continue to review 
these longer stays for the purposes of 
monitoring, determining correct coding, 
and evaluating the medical necessity for 
the beneficiary to remain at the hospital, 
irrespective of the inpatient or 
outpatient ‘‘status’’ to which the 
beneficiary was assigned. In addition, 
claims that evidence that a hospital is 
effectuating systematic abuse of the 2- 
midnight presumption, such as 
unexplained delays in the provision of 
care or aberrancies in billing, may be 
subject to medical review despite 
surpassing 2 midnights after admission. 
Comment: Commenters requested that 
CMS provide guidance on what would 
constitute ‘‘abuse’’ or ‘‘gaming’’ for this 
review purpose. Some commenters were 
concerned that enabling Medicare 
review contractors to make these 
determinations would unravel the 
presumption if the contractors had 
incentives to identify erroneous claims. 
Other commenters believed that 
Medicare contractors, who have 
expertise in utilization review and 
Medicare data, should be tasked with 
identifying providers that are gaming or 
abusing the system for purposes of 
meeting the 2-midnight presumption. 
Comments also suggested that CMS 
examine hospitals’ utilization review 
process rather than rely on claim 
outputs. Commenters also urged CMS to 
be clear that audits will occur only if a 
pattern is detected. 
Response: In the proposed rule, we 
stated that patient status reviews for 
inpatient admissions with lengths of 
stay greater than 2 midnights after 
admission would typically be 
conducted if we suspect that a provider 
is using the 2-midnight presumption to 
effectuate systematic abuse or gaming. 
We have elaborated on our review plans 
above and summarize by stating that 
while we have a statutory obligation to 
ensure that all services are medically 
necessary and correctly paid, we believe 
that these changes in our benchmarks 
and the additional guidance 
accompanying them will allow us to 
reduce the administrative burden of 
reviews. We will do this by reviewing 
stays spanning at least 2 midnights after 
admission for the purpose of monitoring 
and responding to patterns of incorrect 
DRG assignments, inappropriate or 
systemic delays, and lack of medical 
necessity for the stay at the hospital, but 
not for the purpose of routinely denying 
payment for such inpatient admissions 
on the basis that the services should 
have been provided on an outpatient 
basis. We expect to shift our attention to 
the smaller anticipated volume of 0 and 
1 day short stays and then, to the extent 
that facilities correctly apply the 
proposed benchmark, away from short 
stays to other areas with persistently 
high improper payment rates. 
Comment: Commenters voiced 
concerns that while CMS proposed that 
those inpatient hospital admissions 
meeting the 2-midnight benchmark 
would be generally appropriate for Part 
A payment, there is no guarantee that 
the Medicare contractors would follow 
this guidance. Some commenters 
expressed apprehension that the time- 
based policy would not result in fewer 
reviews, as the policy stated that 
contractors could review whether the 
physician’s expectation was reasonable, 
while others thought the doors would be 
opened to more hospital claim audits 
focusing on the need for the beneficiary 
to stay in the hospital for greater than 
2 midnights. Commenters also sought 
assurance from CMS that reviews would 
be conducted based on the information 
the physician had available at the time 
he or she developed the expectation of 
a 2-midnight stay and wrote the order 
pursuant to that expectation. 
VerDate Mar<15>2010 21:51 Aug 16, 2013 Jkt 229001 PO 00000 Frm 00457 Fmt 4701 Sfmt 4700 E:\FR\FM\19AUR2.SGM 19AUR2bjneal on DSK2TWX8P1PROD with RULES
--- page 12 ---
50952 Federal Register / Vol. 78, No. 160 / Monday, August 19, 2013 / Rules and Regulations 
Response: We acknowledge that it is 
very important that clear and consistent 
instructions are provided to facilities, 
physicians, and Medicare review 
contractors. We intend to quickly 
develop implementation instructions, 
manual guidance, and additional 
education to ensure that all entities 
receive initial and ongoing guidance in 
order to promote consistent application 
of these changes and repeatable and 
reproducible decisions on individual 
cases. We intend to ensure that our 
instructions to providers and reviewers 
alike emphasize that the decision to 
admit should be based on and evaluated 
in respect to the information available to 
the admitting practitioner at the time of 
the admission. 
After consideration of the public 
comments we received, we are 
including in this final rule several 
revisions and clarifications to the 
proposed policy. First, we are finalizing 
at § 412.3(e)(1) the 2-midnight 
benchmark as proposed at § 412.3(c)(1), 
that services designated by the OPPS 
Inpatient-Only list as inpatient-only 
would continue to be appropriate for 
inpatient hospital admission and 
payment under Medicare Part A. In 
addition, surgical procedures, 
diagnostic tests, and other treatments 
would be generally deemed appropriate 
for inpatient hospital admission and 
payment under Medicare Part A when 
the physician expects the patient to 
require a stay that crosses at least 2 
midnights and admits the patient to the 
hospital based upon that expectation. 
We proposed at § 412.3(c)(2), and are 
finalizing at § 412.3(e)(2), that if an 
unforeseen circumstance, such as 
beneficiary death or transfer, results in 
a shorter beneficiary stay than the 
physician’s expectation of at least 2 
midnights, the patient may still be 
considered to be appropriately treated 
on an inpatient basis, and the hospital 
inpatient payment may be made under 
Medicare Part A. We proposed, and are 
now finalizing, two distinct, although 
related, medical review policies, a 2- 
midnight benchmark and a 2-midnight 
presumption. The 2-midnight 
benchmark represents guidance to 
admitting practitioners and reviewers to 
identify when an inpatient admission is 
generally appropriate for Medicare 
coverage and payment, while the 2- 
midnight presumption directs medical 
reviewers to select claims for review 
under a presumption that the 
occurrence of 2 midnights after 
admission appropriately signifies an 
inpatient status for a medically 
necessary claim. The starting point for 
the 2-midnight benchmark will be when 
the beneficiary begins receiving hospital 
care on either an inpatient basis or 
outpatient basis. That is, for purposes of 
determining whether the 2-midnight 
benchmark will be met and, therefore, 
whether inpatient admission is 
generally appropriate, the physician 
ordering the admission should account 
for time the beneficiary spent receiving 
outpatient services such as observation 
services, treatments in the emergency 
department, and procedures provided in 
the operating room or other treatment 
area. From the medical review 
perspective, while the time the 
beneficiary spent as an outpatient before 
the admission order is written will not 
be considered inpatient time, it may be 
considered during the medical review 
process for purposes of determining 
whether the 2-midnight benchmark was 
met and, therefore, whether payment is 
generally appropriate under Part A. For 
beneficiaries who do not arrive through 
the emergency department or are 
directly receiving inpatient services (for 
example, inpatient admission order 
written prior to admission for an 
elective admission or transfer from 
another hospital), the starting point for 
medical review purposes will be when 
the beneficiary starts receiving services 
following arrival at the hospital. We 
proposed that both the decision to keep 
the patient at the hospital and the 
expectation of needed duration of the 
stay would be based on such factors as 
beneficiary medical history and 
comorbidities, the severity of signs and 
symptoms, current medical needs, and 
the risk of an adverse event. In this final 
rule, we now are clarifying that risk (or 
probability) of an adverse event relates 
to occurrences during the time period 
for which hospitalization is considered. 
We are finalizing that inpatient 
hospital claims with lengths of stay 
greater than 2 midnights after the formal 
admission following the order will be 
presumed generally appropriate for Part 
A payment and will not be the focus of 
medical review efforts absent evidence 
of systematic gaming, abuse, or delays 
in the provision of care in an attempt to 
qualify for the 2-midnight presumption. 
We also are clarifying in this final rule 
how we will instruct contractors to 
review inpatient stays spanning less 
than 2 midnights after admission. Such 
claims would not be subject to the 
presumption that services were 
appropriately provided during an 
inpatient stay rather than an outpatient 
stay because the total inpatient time did 
not exceed 2 midnights. However, upon 
medical review, the time spent as an 
outpatient will be counted toward 
meeting the 2-midnight benchmark that 
the physician is expected to apply to 
determine the appropriateness of the 
decision to admit. In other words, even 
though the inpatient admission was for 
only 1 Medicare utilization day, medical 
reviewers will consider the fact that the 
beneficiary was in the hospital for 
greater than 2 midnights following the 
onset of care when making the 
determination of whether the inpatient 
stay was reasonable and necessary. For 
those admissions in which the basis for 
the physician expectation of care 
surpassing 2 midnights is reasonable 
and well-documented, reviewers may 
apply the 2-midnight benchmark to 
incorporate all time receiving care in the 
hospital. We will continue to use our 
existing monitoring and audit authority, 
such as the CERT program, to ensure 
that our review efforts focus on those 
subsets of claims with the highest error 
rates and reduce the administrative 
burden for those subsets that have 
demonstrated compliance with our 
clarified and modified guidance. 
4. Impacts of Changes in Admission and 
Medical Review Criteria 
In the FY 2014 IPPS/LTCH PPS 
proposed rule (78 FR 27649 through 
27650), we discussed our actuaries’ 
estimate that our proposed 2-midnight 
policy (referred to in this final rule as 
the 2-midnight benchmark and the 2- 
midnight presumption) would increase 
IPPS expenditures by approximately 
$220 million. These additional 
expenditures result from an expected 
net increase in hospital inpatient 
encounters due to some encounters 
spanning more than 2 midnights moving 
to the IPPS from the OPPS, and some 
encounters of less than 2 midnights 
moving from the IPPS to the OPPS. 
Specifically, our actuaries examined FY 
2009 through FY 2011 Medicare claims 
data for extended hospital outpatient 
encounters and shorter stay hospital 
inpatient encounters and estimated that 
approximately 400,000 encounters 
would shift from outpatient to inpatient 
and approximately 360,000 encounters 
would shift from inpatient to outpatient, 
causing a net shift of 40,000 encounters. 
These estimated shifts of 400,000 
encounters from outpatient to inpatient 
and 360,000 encounters from inpatient 
to outpatient represent a significant 
portion of the approximately 11 million 
encounters paid under the IPPS. The net 
shift of 40,000 encounters represents an 
increase of approximately 1.2 percent in 
the number of shorter stay hospital 
inpatient encounters paid under the 
IPPS. Because shorter stay hospital 
inpatient encounters currently represent 
approximately 17 percent of the IPPS 
expenditures, our actuaries estimated 
VerDate Mar<15>2010 21:51 Aug 16, 2013 Jkt 229001 PO 00000 Frm 00458 Fmt 4701 Sfmt 4700 E:\FR\FM\19AUR2.SGM 19AUR2bjneal on DSK2TWX8P1PROD with RULES
--- page 13 ---
50953 Federal Register / Vol. 78, No. 160 / Monday, August 19, 2013 / Rules and Regulations 
that 17 percent of IPPS expenditures 
would increase by 1.2 percent under our 
proposed policy. These additional 
expenditures are partially offset by 
reduced expenditures from the shift of 
shorter stay hospital inpatient 
encounters to hospital outpatient 
encounters. Our actuaries estimated 
that, on average, the per encounter 
payments for these hospital outpatient 
encounters would be approximately 30 
percent of the per encounter payments 
for the hospital inpatient encounters. In 
light of the widespread impact of the 
proposed 2-midnight policy on the IPPS 
and the systemic nature of the issue of 
inpatient status and improper payments 
under Medicare Part A for short-stay 
inpatient hospital claims, we stated our 
belief that it is appropriate to use our 
exceptions and adjustments authority 
under section 1886(d)(5)(I)(i) of the Act 
to propose to offset the estimated $220 
million in additional IPPS expenditures 
associated with the proposed policy. 
This special exceptions and adjustment 
authority authorizes us to provide ‘‘for 
such other exceptions and adjustments 
to [IPPS] payment amounts . . . as the 
Secretary deems appropriate.’ ’’ We 
proposed to reduce the standardized 
amount, the hospital-specific rates, and 
the Puerto Rico-specific standardized 
amount by 0.2 percent. 
Comment: Commenters generally did 
not support the proposed -0.2 percent 
payment adjustment. Comments 
included the following assertions: CMS 
actuaries’ estimated increase in IPPS 
expenditures of $220 million was 
unsupported and insufficiently 
explained to allow for meaningful 
comment; CMS did not provide 
sufficient rationale for the use of our 
exceptions and adjustments authority 
under section 1886(d)(5)(I)(i) of the Act; 
CMS should not be adjusting the IPPS 
payment rates for expected shifts in 
utilization between inpatient and 
outpatient; CMS did not take into 
account the impact of the Part B 
Inpatient Billing proposed rule in 
developing its estimates; CMS should 
provide parallel treatment regarding the 
financial impact of both the medical 
review policy in the FY 2014 IPPS/ 
LTCH PPS proposed rule and the 
policies in the Part B Inpatient Billing 
proposed rule and offset and restore the 
$4.8 billion dollar reduction to hospital 
payments over 5 years contained in the 
Part B Inpatient Billing proposed rule; 
and CMS’ proposed policy was a 
coverage decision and CMS should not 
adjust IPPS rates for coverage decisions. 
Response: We disagree with 
commenters who indicated that our 
actuaries’ estimated increase in IPPS 
expenditures of $220 million was 
unsupported and insufficiently 
explained to allow for meaningful 
comment. In the FY 2014 IPPS/LTCH 
PPS proposed rule (78 FR 27649), we 
specifically discussed the methodology 
used and the components of the 
estimate. Our actuaries examined FY 
2009 to FY 2011 claims data. Based on 
this examination, we stated the number 
of encounters our actuaries estimated 
would shift from inpatient to outpatient 
(360,000) and the number of encounters 
they estimated would shift from 
outpatient to inpatient (400,000). We 
described the methodology we used to 
translate this net shift of 40,000 
encounters into our $220 million 
estimate, including an estimate of the 
increase these 40,000 encounters 
represent in shorter stay hospital 
inpatient encounters (1.2 percent), the 
share that expenditures for shorter stay 
hospital inpatient encounters represent 
of IPPS expenditures (17 percent), and 
our estimate of the payment difference 
between OPPS and IPPS for these 
encounters (OPPS payment for these 
encounters was estimated to be 30 
percent of the IPPS payment for these 
encounters). In addition to the 
opportunity to comment on the 
estimate, any component of the 
estimate, or the methodology, 
commenters had an opportunity to 
provide alternative estimates for us to 
consider. 
In determining the estimate of the 
number of encounters that would shift 
from outpatient to inpatient, our 
actuaries examined outpatient claims 
for observation or a major procedure. 
Claims not containing observation or a 
major procedure were excluded. The 
number of claims spanning 2 or more 
midnights based on the dates of service 
that were expected to become inpatient 
was approximately 400,000. This 
estimate did not include any 
assumption about outpatient encounters 
shorter than 2 midnights potentially 
becoming inpatient encounters. 
In determining the estimate of the 
number of encounters that would shift 
from inpatient to outpatient, our 
actuaries examined inpatient claims 
containing a surgical MS–DRG. Claims 
containing medical MS–DRGs were 
excluded. The number of claims 
spanning less than 2 midnights based on 
the length of stay that were expected to 
become outpatient, after excluding 
encounters that resulted in death or 
transfers, was approximately 360,000. 
The estimates of the shifts in 
encounters as described above were 
primarily based on FY 2011 Medicare 
inpatient and outpatient claims data. 
However, our actuaries also examined 
FY 2009 and FY 2010 Medicare 
inpatient and outpatient claims data and 
found the results for the earlier years 
were consistent with the FY 2011 
results. 
While there is a certain degree of 
uncertainty surrounding any cost 
estimate, our actuaries have determined 
that the methodology, data, and 
assumptions used are reasonable for the 
purpose of estimating the overall impact 
of our proposed policy. We note that the 
assumptions used for purposes of 
reasonably estimating the overall impact 
in FY 2014 should not be construed as 
absolute statements about every 
individual encounter. For example, we 
fully expect that not every single 
surgical MS–DRG encounter spanning 
less than 2 midnights will shift to 
outpatient and that not every single 
outpatient observation stay or major 
surgical encounter spanning more than 
2 midnights will shift to inpatient. 
We also disagree with commenters 
who indicated that we did not provide 
sufficient rationale for the use of our 
exceptions and adjustments authority 
under section 1886(d)(5)(I)(i) of the Act. 
We discussed that the issue of patient 
status has a substantial impact on 
improper payments under Medicare Part 
A for short-stay inpatient hospital 
claims, citing the fact that the majority 
of improper payments under Medicare 
Part A for short-stay inpatient hospital 
claims have been due to inappropriate 
patient status. In 2012, for example, the 
CERT contractor found that inpatient 
hospital admissions for 1-day stays or 
less had a Part A improper payment rate 
of 36.1 percent. The improper payment 
rate decreased significantly for 2-day or 
3-day stays, which had improper 
payment rates of 13.2 percent and 13.1 
percent, respectively. We stated that we 
believed the magnitude of these national 
figures demonstrates that issues 
surrounding the appropriate 
determination of a beneficiary’s patient 
status are not isolated to a few hospitals. 
We also noted that the RAs had 
recovered more than $1.6 billion in 
improper payments because of 
inappropriate beneficiary patient status. 
While we agree with commenters that 
our exceptions and adjustments 
authority should not be routinely used 
in the IPPS system, we believe that the 
systemic and widespread nature of this 
issue justifies an overall adjustment to 
the IPPS rates and such an adjustment 
is authorized under section 
1886(d)(5)(I)(i) of the Act. 
For similar reasons, while we 
generally agree with commenters that it 
is not necessary to routinely estimate 
utilization shifts to ensure appropriate 
IPPS payments, this is a unique 
situation. Policy clarifications such as 
VerDate Mar<15>2010 21:51 Aug 16, 2013 Jkt 229001 PO 00000 Frm 00459 Fmt 4701 Sfmt 4700 E:\FR\FM\19AUR2.SGM 19AUR2bjneal on DSK2TWX8P1PROD with RULES
--- page 14 ---
50954 Federal Register / Vol. 78, No. 160 / Monday, August 19, 2013 / Rules and Regulations 
this do not usually result in utilization 
shifts of sufficient magnitude and 
breadth to significantly impact the IPPS. 
In this situation, we believe it would be 
inappropriate to ignore such a 
utilization shift in the development of 
the IPPS payment rates. 
With respect to the comments that we 
did not take into account the impact of 
the Part B Inpatient Billing proposed 
rule in developing our estimates, we 
note that our actuaries did take those 
impacts into account in developing our 
proposed adjustment. Our estimate of 
the net shift in FY 2014 encounters 
between inpatient and outpatient would 
have been substantially higher in the 
absence of the policies discussed in the 
Part B Inpatient Billing proposed rule, 
in particular the discussion of timely 
filing. Specifically, in the absence of the 
timely filing requirement, there would 
be fewer inpatient encounters estimated 
to become outpatient encounters, which 
would have resulted in a larger cost 
than our estimated $220 million. 
With respect to the comment that 
CMS should provide parallel treatment 
regarding the financial impact of the 
medical review policy in the FY 2014 
IPPS/LTCH PPS proposed rule and the 
interrelated Part B Inpatient Billing 
proposed rule by offsetting and restoring 
the estimated $4.8 billion dollar 
reduction to hospital payments 
contained in that rule, we note that, 
although we estimated a decrease in 
expenditures as a result of our proposed 
Part B inpatient billing policy, this 
decrease in expenditures is offset by the 
costs of the significant number of 
related administrative appeal decisions 
as well as CMS Ruling 1455–R, which 
allows hospitals to seek payment of Part 
B inpatient services on claims filed 
outside the timely filing period. As 
discussed in greater detail in the 
Regulatory Impact Analysis in the Part 
B Inpatient Billing proposed rule (78 FR 
16643), the combined impact of the 
appeals decisions, CMS Ruling 1455–R, 
and Part B inpatient billing policy, to 
which the 12-month timely filing 
requirement applies, is an estimated 
cost to the Medicare program of $1.03 
billion over the CY 2013 to CY 2017 
time period. We estimate in the 
Regulatory Impact Analysis of the final 
Part B inpatient payment policy in this 
final rule that the combined impact of 
the appeals decisions, CMS Ruling 
1455–R, and the Part B inpatient billing 
policy will cost the Medicare program 
$1.260 billion over the CY 2013 to CY 
2017 time period. 
Finally, we disagree with those 
comments asserting that the 
modification and clarification of our 
current instructions regarding the 
circumstances under which Medicare 
will generally pay for a hospital 
inpatient admission in order to improve 
hospitals’ ability to make appropriate 
admission decisions are actually 
coverage decisions in the context of this 
adjustment. As we clearly stated in the 
FY 2014 IPPS/LTCH PPS proposed rule 
(78 FR 27648), we will continue to 
review individual claims to ensure the 
hospital services furnished to 
beneficiaries are ‘‘reasonable and 
necessary for the diagnosis or treatment 
of illness or injury or to improve the 
functioning of a malformed body 
member,’’ as required by section 
1862(a)(1) of the Act. Any hospital 
service determined to be not reasonable 
or necessary may not be paid under 
Medicare Part A or Part B. In the context 
of this adjustment, these are not new 
hospital services. 
Our actuaries continue to estimate 
there will be approximately $220 
million in additional expenditures 
resulting from our 2-midnight 
benchmark and 2-midnight presumption 
medical review policies. This net 
increase in hospital inpatient 
encounters is due to some encounters 
spanning more than 2 midnights moving 
to the IPPS from the OPPS, and some 
encounters of less than 2 midnights 
moving from the IPPS to the OPPS. 
Therefore, after consideration of the 
comments we received, and for the 
reasons described above, we are 
finalizing a reduction to the 
standardized amount, the hospital- 
specific rates, and the Puerto Rico- 
specific standardized amount of ¥0.2 
percent to offset the additional $220 
million in expenditures. 
XII. MedPAC Recommendations 
Under section 1886(e)(4)(B) of the 
Act, the Secretary must consider 
MedPAC’s recommendations regarding 
hospital inpatient payments. Under 
section 1886(e)(5) of the Act, the 
Secretary must publish in the annual 
proposed and final IPPS rules the 
Secretary’s recommendations regarding 
MedPAC’s recommendations. We have 
reviewed MedPAC’s March 2013 
‘‘Report to the Congress: Medicare 
Payment Policy’’ and have given the 
recommendations in the report 
consideration in conjunction with the 
policies set forth in this final rule. 
MedPAC recommendations for the IPPS 
for FY 2014 are addressed in Appendix 
B to this final rule. 
For further information relating 
specifically to the MedPAC reports or to 
obtain a copy of the reports, contact 
MedPAC at (202) 653–7226, or visit 
MedPAC’s Web site at: http:// 
www.medpac.gov. 
XIII. Other Required Information 
A. Requests for Data From the Public 
In order to respond promptly to 
public requests for data related to the 
prospective payment system, we have 
established a process under which 
commenters can gain access to raw data 
on an expedited basis. Generally, the 
data are now available on compact disc 
(CD) format. However, many of the files 
are available on the Internet at: http:// 
www.cms.hhs.gov/Medicare/Medicare- 
Fee-for-Service-Payment/ 
AcuteInpatientPPS/index.html. We 
listed the data files and the cost for each 
file, if applicable, in the FY 2014 IPPS/ 
LTCH PPS proposed rule (78 FR 27746 
through 27748). 
Commenters interested in discussing 
any data used in constructing the 
proposed rule or this final rule should 
contact should contact Nisha Bhat at 
(410) 786–5320. 
B. Collection of Information 
Requirements 
1. Statutory Requirement for Solicitation 
of Comments 
Under the Paperwork Reduction Act 
of 1995, we are required to provide 60- 
day notice in the Federal Register and 
solicit public comment before a 
collection of information requirement is 
submitted to the Office of Management 
and Budget (OMB) for review and 
approval. In order to fairly evaluate 
whether an information collection 
should be approved by OMB, section 
3506(c)(2)(A) of the Paperwork 
Reduction Act of 1995 requires that we 
solicit comment on the following issues: 
• The need for the information 
collection and its usefulness in carrying 
out the proper functions of our agency. 
• The accuracy of our estimate of the 
information collection burden. 
• The quality, utility, and clarity of 
the information to be collected. 
• Recommendations to minimize the 
information collection burden on the 
affected public, including automated 
collection techniques. 
In the FY 2014 IPPS/LTCH PPS 
proposed rule (78 FR 27748 through 
27755), we solicited public comment on 
each of these issues for the following 
sections of this document that contain 
information collection requirements 
(ICRs). We discuss and respond to any 
public comments we received in the 
relevant sections. 
2. ICRs for Add-On Payments for New 
Services and Technologies 
Section II.I.1. of the preamble of the 
proposed rule and this final rule 
discusses add-on payments for new 
VerDate Mar<15>2010 21:51 Aug 16, 2013 Jkt 229001 PO 00000 Frm 00460 Fmt 4701 Sfmt 4700 E:\FR\FM\19AUR2.SGM 19AUR2bjneal on DSK2TWX8P1PROD with RULES
--- page 15 ---
50955 Federal Register / Vol. 78, No. 160 / Monday, August 19, 2013 / Rules and Regulations 
services and technologies. Specifically, 
this section states that applicants for 
add-on payments for new medical 
services or technologies for FY 2015 
must submit a formal request. A formal 
request includes a full description of the 
clinical applications of the medical 
service or technology and the results of 
any clinical evaluations demonstrating 
that the new medical service or 
technology represents a substantial 
clinical improvement. In addition, the 
request must contain a significant 
sample of the data to demonstrate that 
the medical service or technology meets 
the high-cost threshold. 
We believe the burden associated 
with this requirement is exempt from 
the PRA under 5 CFR 1320.3(c), which 
defines the agency collection of 
information subject to the requirements 
of the PRA as information collection 
imposed on 10 or more persons within 
any 12-month period. This information 
collection does not impact 10 or more 
entities in a 12-month period. In FYs 
2008, 2009, 2010, 2011, 2012, 2013, and 
FY 2014, we received 1, 4, 5, 3, 3, 5, and 
5 applications, respectively. 
We did not receive any public 
comments regarding this information 
collection. 
3. ICRs for the Occupational Mix 
Adjustment to the FY 2014 Index 
(Hospital Wage Index Occupational Mix 
Survey) 
Section III.F. of the preamble of the 
proposed rule (78 FR 27554 through 
27555) and this final rule discusses the 
occupational mix adjustment to the 
proposed and final FY 2014 wage index, 
respectively. While the preamble of 
these rules does not contain any new 
ICRs, we note that there is an OMB 
approved information collection request 
associated with the hospital wage index. 
Section 304(c) of Public Law 106–554 
amended section 1886(d)(3)(E) of the 
Act to require CMS to collect data at 
least once every 3 years on the 
occupational mix of employees for each 
short-term, acute care hospital 
participating in the Medicare program 
in order to construct an occupational 
mix adjustment to the wage index. We 
collect the data via the occupational mix 
survey. 
The burden associated with this 
information collection requirement is 
the time and effort required to collect 
and submit the data in the Hospital 
Wage Index Occupational Mix Survey to 
CMS. The aforementioned burden is 
subject to the PRA; it is currently 
approved under OCN 0938–0907. 
4. Hospital Applications for Geographic 
Reclassifications by the MGCRB 
Section III.H.2. of the preamble of the 
proposed rule (78 FR 27557 through 
27558) and this final rule discusses 
proposed and final revisions, 
respectively, to the wage index based on 
hospital redesignations. As stated in 
that section, under section 1886(d)(10) 
of the Act, the MGCRB has the authority 
to accept short-term IPPS hospital 
applications requesting geographic 
reclassification for wage index or 
standardized payment amounts and to 
issue decisions on these requests by 
hospitals for geographic reclassification 
for purposes of payment under the IPPS. 
The burden associated with this 
application process is the time and 
effort necessary for an IPPS hospital to 
complete and submit an application for 
reclassification to the MGCRB. While 
this requirement is subject to the PRA, 
the associated burden was previously 
approved under OCN 0938–0573. 
However, the information collection 
expired on December 31, 2011. We are 
currently seeking to reinstate the 
information collection and, as required 
by the PRA, will announce public notice 
and comment periods in the Federal 
Register separate from this rulemaking. 
5. ICRs for Application for GME 
Resident Slots 
The information collection 
requirements associated with the 
preservation of resident cap positions 
from closed hospitals, addressed under 
section V.J.3. of this preamble, are not 
subject to the Paperwork Reduction Act, 
as stated in section 5506 of the 
Affordable Care Act. 
6. ICRs for the Hospital Inpatient 
Quality Reporting (IQR) Program 
The Hospital IQR Program (formerly 
referred to as the Reporting Hospital 
Quality Data for Annual Payment 
(RHQDAPU) Program) was originally 
established to implement section 501(b) 
of the MMA, Public Law 108–173. This 
program expanded our voluntary 
Hospital Quality Initiative. The Hospital 
IQR Program originally consisted of a 
‘‘starter set’’ of 10 quality measures. The 
collection of information associated 
with the original starter set of quality 
measures was previously approved 
under OMB control number 0938–0918. 
All of the information collection 
requirements previously approved 
under OMB control number 0938–0918 
have been combined with the 
information collection request 
previously approved under OMB 
control number 0938–1022. We will no 
longer be using the OMB control 
number 0938–0918. 
We added additional quality measures 
to the Hospital IQR Program and 
submitted the information collection 
request to OMB for approval. This 
expansion of the Hospital IQR measures 
was part of our implementation of 
section 5001(a) of the DRA. Section 
1886(b)(3)(B)(viii)(III) of the Act, added 
by section 5001(a) of the DRA, requires 
that the Secretary expand the ‘‘starter 
set’’’ of 10 quality measures that were 
established by the Secretary as of 
November 1, 2003, to include measures 
‘‘that the Secretary determines to be 
appropriate for the measurement of the 
quality of care furnished by hospitals in 
inpatient settings.’’ The burden 
associated with these reporting 
requirements was previously approved 
under OMB control number 0938–1022. 
In the FY 2013 IPPS/LTCH PPS final 
rule (77 FR 53666), we stated that, for 
the FY 2016 payment determinations 
and subsequent years updates, we are 
seeking OMB approval for a revised 
information collection request using the 
same OMB control number (0938–1022). 
In the revised request we will add the 
5 claims-based measures that are 
finalized in this final rule: (1) 30-day 
risk standardized COPD Readmission; 
(2) 30-day risk standardized COPD 
Mortality; (3) 30-day risk standardized 
Stroke Readmission; (4) 30-day risk 
standardized Stroke Mortality; and (5) 
AMI payment per Episode of Care. We 
are also finalizing the removal of six 
chart-abstracted measures: (1) PN 3b: 
Blood Culture Performed in the 
Emergency Department Prior to First 
Antibiotic Received in the Hospital; (2) 
HF 1: Discharge Instructions; and (3) 
AMI–2: Aspirin Prescribed at Discharge; 
(4) AMI–10: Statin Prescribed at 
Discharge; (5) HF–3: ACEI or ARB for 
LVSD; and (6) SCIP-Inf–10: Surgery 
Patients with Perioperative Temperature 
Management as well as one structural 
measure, Systematic Clinical Database 
Registry for Stroke Care. We are 
suspending collection of IMM 1: 
Immunization for Pneumonia. 
Because claims-based measures can 
be calculated based on data that are 
already reported to the Medicare 
program for payment purposes, we 
believe no additional information 
collection will be required from the 
hospitals. However, we do believe there 
will be a reduction in the burden 
associated with the removal of six chart- 
abstracted measures, suspension of one 
chart-abstracted measures, and removal 
of one structural measure. We estimate 
a reduction in burden associated with 
data collection for chart-abstracted 
measures and associated forms. For the 
VerDate Mar<15>2010 21:51 Aug 16, 2013 Jkt 229001 PO 00000 Frm 00461 Fmt 4701 Sfmt 4700 E:\FR\FM\19AUR2.SGM 19AUR2bjneal on DSK2TWX8P1PROD with RULES