
--- page 1 ---
1 – Definition of Inpatient Hospital Services 
(Rev. 1, 10-01-03) 
 
Inpatient hospital services are defined in Title XVIII of the Social Security Act (the Act) 
and in the regulations (42 CFR 409.10): 
 
A.  Subject to the conditions, limitations, and exceptions set forth in this subpart, the term 
"inpatient hospital or inpatient CAH services" means the following services furnished to 
an inpatient of a participating hospital or of a participating CAH or, in the case of 
emergency services or services in foreign hospitals, to an inpatient of a qualified hospital: 
 
1.  Bed and board. 
 
2.  Nursing services and other related services. 
 
3.  Use of hospital or CAH facilities. 
 
4.  Medical social services. 
 
5.  Drugs, biologicals, supplies, appliances, and equipment. 
 
6.  Certain other diagnostic or therapeutic services. 
 
7.  Medical or surgical services provided by certain interns or residents-in- 
training. 
 
8.  Transportation services, including transport by ambulance. 
 
B.  Inpatient hospital services does not include the following types of services: 
 
1.  Posthospital SNF care, as described in 42
 CFR 409.20, furnished by a hospital 
or a critical access hospital that has a swing-bed approval. 
 
2.  Nursing facility services, described in 42 CFR 440.155
 that may be furnished 
as a Medicaid service under title XIX of the Act in a swing- bed hospital that 
has an approval to furnish nursing facility services. 
 
3.  Physician services that meet the requirements of 42 CFR 415.102(a)
 for 
payment on a fee schedule basis. 
 
4.  Physician assistant services, as defined in §1861(s)(2)(K)(i)
 of the Act. 
 
5.  Nurse practitioner and clinical nurse specialist services, as defined in 
§1861(s)(2)(K)(ii)
 of the Act. 
 
6.  Certified nurse mid-wife services, as defined in §1861(gg)
 of the Act. 
--- page 2 ---
 
7.  Qualified psychologist services, as defined in §1861(ii) of the Act. 
 
8.  Services of an anesthetist, as defined in 42 CFR 410.69
. 
 
10 - Covered Inpatient Hospital Services Covered Under Part A 
(Rev. 234, Issued: 03-10-17, Effective: 01-01-16, Implementation: 06-12-17) 
 
Patients covered under hospital insurance are entitled to have payment made on their 
behalf for inpatient hospital services.  (Inpatient hospital services do not include extended 
care services provided by hospitals pursuant to swing bed approvals.  See Pub. 
100-02, 
Chapter 8, §10.3, "Hospital Providers of Extended Care Services.").  However, both 
inpatient hospital and inpatient SNF benefits are provided under Part A - Hospital 
Insurance Benefits for the Aged and Disabled, of Title XVIII). 
 
Additional information concerning the following topics can be found in the following 
chapters of this manual: 
 
• Benefit Period is found in Chapter 3 
 
• Counting Inpatient Days is found in Chapter 3 
 
• Lifetime reserve days is found in Chapter 5 
 
• Related payment information is housed in the Provider Reimbursement Manual 
 
Blood must be furnished on a day which counts as a day of inpatient hospital services to 
be covered as a Part A service and to count toward the blood deductible.  Thus, blood is 
not covered under Part A and does not count toward the Part A blood deductible when 
furnished to an inpatient after the inpatient has exhausted all benefit days in a benefit 
period, or where the individual has elected not to use lifetime reserve days.  However, 
where the patient is discharged on their first day of entitlement or on the hospital's first 
day of participation, the hospital is permitted to submit a billing form with no 
accommodation charge, but with ancillary charges including blood. 
 
The records for all Medicare hospital inpatient discharges are maintained in CMS for 
statistical analysis and use in determining future Prospective Payment System (PPS) 
Diagnosis Related Group (DRG) classifications and rates. 
 
Non-PPS hospitals do not pay for noncovered services generally excluded from coverage 
in the Medicare Program.  This may result in denial of a part of the billed charges or in 
denial of the entire admission, depending upon circumstance.  In PPS hospitals, the 
following are also possible: 
 
--- page 3 ---
1. In appropriately admitted cases where a noncovered procedure was performed, 
denied services may result in payment of a different DRG (i.e., one which 
excludes payment for the noncovered procedure); or  
 
2. In appropriately admitted cases that become cost outlier cases, denied services 
may lead to denial of some or all of an outlier payment. 
 
The following examples illustrate this principle.  If care is noncovered because a patient 
does not need to be hospitalized, the A/B MAC Part A denies the admission and makes 
no Part A (i.e., PPS) payment unless paid under limitation on liability.  Under limitation 
on liability, Medicare payment may be made when the provider and the beneficiary were 
not aware the services were not necessary and could not reasonably be expected to know 
that the services were not necessary.  For detailed instructions, see 
Pub. 100-04, Medicare 
Claims Processing Manual, Chapter 30,"Limitation on Liability" section 20.  If a patient 
is appropriately hospitalized but receives (beyond routine services) only noncovered care, 
the admission is denied. 
 
NOTE:  The A/B MAC Part A does not deny an admission that includes covered care, 
even if noncovered care was also rendered.  Under PPS, Medicare assumes that it is 
paying for only the covered care rendered whenever covered services needed to treat 
and/or diagnose the illness were in fact provided. 
 
If a noncovered procedure is provided along with covered nonroutine care, a DRG 
change rather than an admission denial might occur.  If noncovered procedures are 
elevating costs into the cost outlier category, outlier payment is denied in whole or in 
part. 
 
When the hospital is included in PPS, most of the subsequent discussion regarding 
coverage of inpatient hospital services is relevant only in the context of determining the 
appropriateness of admissions, which DRG, if any, to pay, and the appropriateness of 
payment for any outlier cases. 
 
If a patient receives items or services in excess of, or more expensive than, those for 
which payment can be made, payment is made only for the covered items or services or 
for only the appropriate prospective payment amount.  This provision applies not only to 
inpatient services, but also to all hospital services under Parts A and B of the program.  If 
the items or services were requested by the patient, the hospital may charge him or her 
the difference between the amount customarily charged for the services requested and the 
amount customarily charged for covered services. 
 
An inpatient is a person who has been admitted to a hospital for bed occupancy for 
purposes of receiving inpatient hospital services (see §10.2 below).  Generally, a patient 
is considered an inpatient if formally admitted as inpatient with the expectation that he or 
she will require hospital care that is expected to span at least two midnights and occupy a 
bed even though it later develops that the patient can be discharged or transferred to 
another hospital and not actually use a hospital bed overnight. 
--- page 4 ---
 
The physician or other practitioner responsible for a patient's care at the hospital is also 
responsible for deciding whether the patient should be admitted as an inpatient.  
Physicians should use the expectation of the patient to require hospital care that spans at 
least two midnights period as a benchmark, i.e., they should order admission for patients 
who are expected to require a hospital stay that crosses two midnights and the medical 
record supports that reasonable expectation.  However, the decision to admit a patient is a 
complex medical judgment which can be made only after the physician has considered a 
number of factors, including the patient's medical history and current medical needs, the 
types of facilities available to inpatients and to outpatients, the hospital's by-laws and 
admissions policies, and the relative appropriateness of treatment in each setting.  Factors 
to be considered when making the decision to admit include such things as: 
 
• The severity of the signs and symptoms exhibited by the patient; 
 
• The medical predictability of something adverse happening to the patient; 
 
• The need for diagnostic studies that appropriately are outpatient services (i.e., 
their performance does not ordinarily require the patient to remain at the hospital 
for 24 hours or more) to assist in assessing whether the patient should be 
admitted; and  
 
• The availability of diagnostic procedures at the time when and at the location 
where the patient presents. 
 
Admissions of particular patients are not covered or noncovered solely on the basis of the 
length of time the patient actually spends in the hospital.  In certain specific situations 
coverage of services on an inpatient or outpatient basis is determined by the following 
rules: 
 
Minor Surgery or Other Treatment - When patients with known diagnoses enter a 
hospital for a specific minor surgical procedure or other treatment that is expected to keep 
them in the hospital for only a few hours (less than 24), they are considered outpatients 
for coverage purposes regardless of: the hour they came to the hospital, whether they 
used a bed, and whether they remained in the hospital past midnight. 
 
Renal Dialysis - Renal dialysis treatments are usually covered only as outpatient services 
but may under certain circumstances be covered as inpatient services depending on the 
patient's condition.  Patients staying at home, who are ambulatory, whose conditions are 
stable and who come to the hospital for routine chronic dialysis treatments, and not for a 
diagnostic workup or a change in therapy, are considered outpatients.  On the other hand, 
patients undergoing short-term dialysis until their kidneys recover from an acute illness 
(acute dialysis), or persons with borderline renal failure who develop acute renal failure 
every time they have an illness and require dialysis (episodic dialysis) are usually 
inpatients.  A patient may begin dialysis as an inpatient and then progress to an outpatient 
status. 
--- page 5 ---
 
Under original Medicare, the Quality Improvement Organization (QIO), for each hospital 
is responsible for deciding, during review of inpatient admissions on a case-by-case basis, 
whether the admission was medically necessary.  Medicare law authorizes the QIO to 
make these judgments, and the judgments are binding for purposes of Medicare coverage.  
In making these judgments, however, QIOs consider only the medical evidence which 
was available to the physician at the time an admission decision had to be made.  They do 
not take into account other information (e.g., test results) which became available only 
after admission, except in cases where considering the post-admission information would 
support a finding that an admission was medically necessary. 
 
Refer to chapters 4 and 7 of Pub. 100-10, Quality Improvement Organization Manual
 
with regard to initial determinations for these services.  The QIO will review the swing 
bed services in these PPS hospitals as well. 
 
NOTE:  When patients requiring extended care services are admitted to beds in a 
hospital, they are considered inpatients of the hospital.  In such cases, the services 
furnished in the hospital will not be considered extended care services, and payment may 
not be made under the program for such services unless the services are extended care 
services furnished pursuant to a swing bed agreement granted to the hospital by the 
Secretary of Health and Human Services. 
 
10.1 - Bed and Board 
(Rev. 1, 10-01-03) 
A3-3101.1, HO-210.1 
 
10.1.1 - Accommodations - General 
(Rev. 1, 10-01-03) 
A3-3101.1.A, HO-210.1.A 
 
The program will pay the same amount for routine accommodations services whether the 
patient has a private room not medically necessary, a private room medically necessary 
(Medicare does not pay for deluxe accommodations in any case), a semiprivate room (2-, 
3-, or 4-bed accommodations), or ward accommodations, if its ward accommodations are 
consistent with program purposes (see §10.1.6
 below). 
 
A provider having both private and semiprivate accommodations may nevertheless 
charge the patient a differential for a private room if: 
 
• The private room is not medically necessary; and  
 
• The patient (or relative or other person acting on their behalf) has requested the 
private room, and the provider informs them of the amount of charge at the time 
of the request. 
 
--- page 6 ---
The private room differential may not exceed the difference between the customary 
charge for the accommodations furnished and the most prevalent semiprivate 
accommodation rate at the time of the patient's admission. 
 
Where the provider bills for a private room as a covered service, i.e., shows the charge 
for the room as a covered charge on the Form CMS-1450, the A/B MAC (A) will deem 
the private room to be medically necessary.  Where the provider, on the other hand, 
shows a private differential as a noncovered charge, the A/B MAC (A) will assume that 
the private room is not medically necessary. 
 
If the beneficiary (or their representative) protests a charge for the private room on the 
grounds that the privacy was medically necessary, such protest will, if not in written 
form, be reduced to writing and forwarded to the A/B MAC (A).  The A/B MAC (A) will 
then develop the facts and make a specific determination regarding the medical necessity 
of the private room.  (If an A/B MAC (A) receives many protests of this kind, the 
provider may need guidance on what constitutes medical necessity for privacy).  If the 
protest is received after the claim is processed, it will be treated as a request for 
reconsideration. 
 
If at any time in the course of development (or thereafter within the period when the 
determination is not administratively final), the provider acknowledges that the private 
room was medically necessary; the A/B MAC (A) will make an immediate finding to this 
effect. 
 
Where it is necessary to develop the medical necessity of a private room, the guidelines 
in subsections §§10.1.2 and 10.1.3
 below will apply. 
 
10.1.2 - Medical Necessity - Need for Isolation 
(Rev. 1, 10-01-03) 
A3-3101.1.B, HO-210.1.B 
 
A private room is medically necessary where isolation of a beneficiary is required to 
avoid jeopardizing their health or recovery, or that of other patients who are likely to be 
alarmed or disturbed by the beneficiary's symptoms or treatment or subjected to infection 
by the beneficiary's communicable disease.  For example, communicable diseases, heart 
attacks, cerebra-vascular accidents, and psychotic episodes may require isolation of the 
patient for certain periods.  (See §10.1.3
 below concerning medical necessity not based 
on need for isolation). 
 
In establishing the medical necessity for isolation, the date of the physician's written 
statement is not controlling, nor is the presence of a written statement.  The crucial 
question is whether a private room was ordered by the physician because it is necessary 
for the health of the patient himself or herself or of other patients.  In the absence of such 
an order, a patient who requested the room with knowledge of the amount of the charge 
may be charged appropriately, even though a physician subsequently submits a statement 
that the room was medically necessary.  There may be cases in which the physician's 
--- page 7 ---
written statement of medical necessity, though dated after admission or even after 
discharge, merely confirms an order made informally at or before the time the beneficiary 
was admitted to the private room (e.g., the physician made arrangements by phone for the 
patient's admission, gave the diagnosis, and stated the beneficiary would need a private 
room).  In such cases, assuming that the private room was medically necessary, the lack 
of a written statement by the physician, or the fact that the written statement was prepared 
after discharge, would not be controlling.  The patient may not be charged. 
 
10.1.3 - Medical Necessity - Admission Required and Only Private 
Rooms Available 
(Rev. 1, 10-01-03) 
A3-3101.1.C, HO-210.1.C 
 
A private room is considered to be medically necessary even though the beneficiary's 
condition does not require isolation if he/she needs immediate hospitalization (i.e., the 
beneficiary's medical condition is such that hospitalization cannot be deferred) and the 
hospital has no semiprivate or ward accommodations available at the time of admission. 
 
It need not be considered whether semiprivate or ward accommodations were available in 
some other accessible hospital.  Where medical necessity exists, the provider may not 
charge the beneficiary a private room differential until semiprivate or ward 
accommodations become available.  Thereafter the provider may transfer the patient to 
the nonprivate accommodations, or allow them to continue occupancy of the private 
room, subject to an appropriate differential charge (described in §10.1.1
 above) if they 
request the private room with knowledge of the amount of the charge. 
 
If the admission could be deferred until semiprivate or ward accommodations become 
available, the beneficiary should be informed of the amount of the differential he/she 
must pay for a private room if he/she wishes to be admitted immediately.  The 
beneficiary may be charged the specified differential if he/she has been admitted to the 
private room at their request (or at the request of their representative) with knowledge of 
the amount of the charge. 
 
10.1.4 - Charges for Deluxe Private Room 
(Rev. 1, 10-01-03) 
A3-3101.1.D, HO-210.1.D 
 
Beneficiaries found to need a private room (either because they need isolation for 
medical reasons or because they need immediate admission when no other 
accommodations are available) may be assigned to any of the provider's private rooms.  
They do not have the right to insist on the private room of their choice, but their 
preferences should be given the same consideration as if they were paying all provider 
charges themselves.  The program does not, under any circumstances, pay for personal 
comfort items.  Thus, the program does not pay for deluxe accommodations and/or 
services.  These would include a suite, or a room substantially more spacious than is 
required for treatment, or specially equipped or decorated, or serviced for the comfort and 
--- page 8 ---
convenience of persons willing to pay a differential for such amenities.  If the beneficiary 
(or representative) requests such deluxe accommodations, the provider should advise that 
there will be a charge, not covered by Medicare, of a specified amount per day (not 
exceeding the differential defined in the next sentence); and may charge the beneficiary 
that amount for each day he/she occupies the deluxe accommodations.  The maximum 
amount the provider may charge the beneficiary for such accommodations is the 
differential between the most prevalent private room rate at the time of admission and the 
customary charge for the room occupied.  Beneficiaries may not be charged this 
differential if they (or their representative) do not request the deluxe accommodations. 
 
The beneficiary may not be charged such a differential in private room rates if that 
differential is based on factors other than personal comfort items.  Such factors might 
include differences between older and newer wings, proximity to lounge, elevators or 
nursing stations, desirable view, etc.  Such rooms are standard 1-bed units and not deluxe 
rooms for purposes of these instructions, even though the provider may call them deluxe 
and have a higher customary charge for them.  No additional charge may be imposed 
upon the beneficiary who is assigned to a room that may be somewhat more desirable 
because of these factors. 
 
10.1.5 - All Private Room Providers 
(Rev. 1, 10-01-03) 
A3-3101.E, HO-210.1.E 
 
If the patient is admitted to a provider which has only private accommodations, and no 
semiprivate or ward accommodations, medical necessity will be deemed to exist for the 
accommodations furnished.  Beneficiaries may not be subjected to an extra charge for a 
private room in an all-private room provider. 
 
10.1.6 - Wards 
(Rev. 1, 10-01-03) 
A3-3101.1.F, HO-210.1.F 
 
The law contemplates that Medicare patients should not be assigned to ward 
accommodations except at the patient's request or for a reason consistent with the 
purposes of the health insurance program. 
 
When ward accommodations are furnished at the patient's request or for a reason 
determined to be consistent with the program's purposes, payment will be based on the 
average per diem cost of routine services (see §10.1.1
 above).  Where ward 
accommodations are assigned for other reasons, the law provides what may be a 
substantial penalty.  (See 
§10.1.6.2 below). 
 
Any request by the patient (or relative or other person responsible for his or her affairs) 
for ward accommodations must be obtained by the provider in writing and kept in its 
files. 
 
--- page 9 ---
10.1.6.1 - Assignment Consistent With Program Purposes 
(Rev. 1, 10-01-03) 
A3-3101.1.F.1, HO-210.1.F.1 
 
It is considered to be consistent with the program's purposes to assign the patient to ward 
accommodations if all semiprivate accommodations are occupied, or the facility has no 
semiprivate accommodations.  However, the patient must be moved to semiprivate 
accommodations if they become available during the stay. 
 
Some hospitals have a policy of placing in wards all patients who do not have private 
physicians.  Such a practice may be consistent with the purposes of the program if the 
A/B MAC (A) determines that the ward assignment inures to the benefit of the patient.  
In making this determination, the principal consideration is whether the assignment is 
likely to result in better medical treatment of the patient (e.g., it facilitates necessary 
medical and nursing supervision and treatment).  The A/B MAC (A) should ask a 
provider having this policy to submit a statement describing how the assignments are 
made, their purpose, and the effect on the care of patients so assigned. 
 
If the A/B MAC (A) makes a favorable determination on a practice affecting all ward 
assignments of Medicare patients in the institution, a reference should be made on the 
appropriate billing form for patients to whom the hospital assigned a ward pursuant to 
such practice. 
 
10.1.6.2 - Assignment Not Consistent With Program Purposes 
(Rev. 1, 10-01-03) 
A3-3101.1.F.2, HO-210.1.F.2 
 
It is not consistent with the purposes of the law to assign a patient ward accommodation 
based on their social or economic status, their national origin, race, or religion, or their 
entitlement to benefits as a Medicare patient, or any other such discriminatory reason.  It 
is also inconsistent with the purposes of the law to assign patients to ward 
accommodations merely for the convenience or financial advantage of the institution.  
Additionally, under DRGs, there no longer is a reduction to payment or an adjustment to 
the end of year settlement. 
 
10.1.7 - Charges 
(Rev. 1, 10-01-03) 
A3-3101.1.G, HO-210.1.G 
 
Customary charges means amounts which the hospital or skilled nursing facility is 
uniformly charging patients currently for specific services and accommodations.  The 
most prevalent rate or charge is the rate that applies to the greatest number of semiprivate 
or private beds in the institution. 
 
10.2 – Hospital Inpatient Admission Order and Certification 
(Rev. 234, Issued: 03-10-17, Effective: 01-01-16, Implementation: 06-12-17) 
--- page 10 ---
 
The order to admit as an inpatient (“practitioner order”) is a critical element in clarifying 
when an individual is considered an inpatient of a hospital, including a critical access 
hospital (CAH), and is therefore required for all hospital inpatient cases for hospital 
inpatient coverage and payment under Part A.  As a condition of payment for hospital 
inpatient services under Medicare Part A, according to 
section 1814(a) of the Social 
Security Act, CMS is requiring, only for long-stay cases and outlier cases, separate 
physician certification of the medical necessity that such services be provided on an 
inpatient basis.  The signed physician certification is considered, along with other 
documentation in the medical record, as evidence that hospital inpatient service(s) were 
reasonable and necessary. 
 
The following guidance applies to all inpatient hospital and CAH services unless 
otherwise specified.  For the remainder of this guidance, references to hospitals includes 
CAHs.  The complete requirements for the physician certification are found in 
42 CFR 
Part 424 subpart B, and requirements for admission orders are found at 42 CFR 412.3. 
 
A. Physician Certification.  Physician certification of inpatient services is required 
for cases that are 20 inpatient days or more (long-stay cases), for outlier cases of 
hospitals other than inpatient psychiatric facilities and for cases of CAHs.  (See 
CY 2015 Outpatient Prospective Payment System Final Rule
, 79 FR 66997 and 
42 CFR 412 Subpart F, 42 CFR 424.13 and 42 CFR 424.15): 
 
1. Content:  The physician certification includes the following information: 
 
a. Reason for inpatient services:  The physician certifies the reasons for 
either— (i) Continued hospitalization of the patient for inpatient medical 
treatment or medically required inpatient diagnostic study; or (ii) Special 
or unusual services for outlier cases under the applicable prospective 
payment system for inpatient services.  For example, documentation of an 
admitting diagnosis could fulfill this part of the certification requirement. 
 
b. The estimated (or actual) time the beneficiary requires or required in the 
hospital:  The physician certifies the estimated time in the hospital the 
beneficiary requires (if the certification is completed prior to discharge) or 
the actual time in the hospital (if the certification is completed at 
discharge).  Estimated or actual length of stay is most commonly reflected 
in the progress notes where the practitioner discusses the assessment and 
plan.  For the purposes of meeting the requirement for certification, 
expected or actual length of stay may be documented in the order or a 
separate certification or recertification form, but it is also acceptable if 
discussed in the progress notes assessment and plan or as part of routine 
discharge planning. 
 
If the reason an inpatient is still in the hospital is that they are waiting for 
availability of a skilled nursing facility (SNF) bed, the regulations at 
42 
--- page 11 ---
CFR 424.13(c) and 424.14(e) provide that a beneficiary who is already 
appropriately an inpatient can be kept in the hospital as an inpatient if the 
only reason they remain in the hospital is they are waiting for a post-acute 
SNF bed.  The physician may certify the need for continued inpatient 
admission on this basis. 
 
c. The plans for posthospital care, if appropriate, and as provided in 42 CFR 
424.13. 
 
d. For inpatient CAH services only, the physician must certify that the 
beneficiary may reasonably be expected to be discharged or transferred to 
a hospital within 96 hours after admission to the CAH. 
 
Time as an outpatient at the CAH does not count towards the 96 hour 
certification requirement.  The clock for the 96 hour certification 
requirement only begins once the individual is admitted to the CAH as an 
inpatient.  Time in a CAH swing-bed also does not count towards the 96 
hour certification requirement. 
 
The 96-hour certification requirement is based on an expectation at the 
time of admission.  If a physician certifies in good faith that an individual 
may reasonably be expected to be discharged or transferred to a hospital 
within 96 hours after admission to the CAH, and something unforeseen 
occurs that causes the individual to stay longer at the CAH, the CAH 
would be paid for that unforeseen extended inpatient stay as long as that 
individual’s stay does not cause the CAH to exceed its 96-hour annual 
average condition of participation requirement.  However, if a physician 
cannot in good faith certify that an individual may reasonably be expected 
to be discharged or transferred within 96 hours after admission to the 
CAH, the CAH will not receive Medicare reimbursement for any portion 
of that individual’s inpatient stay.  This would be determined based on a 
medical review of the case. 
 
All certification requirements must be completed, signed, and documented 
in the medical record no later than 1 day before the date on which the 
claim for payment for the inpatient CAH service is submitted, as provided 
in the FY15 IPPS Final Rule and 42 CFR 424.11 and 42 CFR 424.15
. 
 
e. Inpatient Rehabilitation Facilities (IRFs):  The documentation that IRFs 
are already required to complete to meet the IRF coverage requirements 
(such as the preadmission screening (including the physician review and 
concurrence), the post-admission physician evaluation, and the required 
admission orders) may be used to satisfy the certification and 
recertification statement requirements. 
 
--- page 12 ---
2. Timing:  Outlier cases must be certified and recertified as provided in 42 CFR 
424.13.  Under extenuating circumstances, delayed initial certification or 
recertification of an outlier case may be acceptable as long as it does not 
extend past discharge.  For all other long stay cases, the certification must be 
signed and documented no later than 20 days into the inpatient portion of the 
hospital stay. 
 
3. Authorization to sign the certification:  The certification or recertification 
may be signed only by one of the following: 
 
(1) A physician who is a doctor of medicine or osteopathy. 
(2) A dentist in the circumstances specified in 42 CFR 424.13(d)
. 
(3) A doctor of podiatric medicine if his or her certification is consistent 
with the functions he or she is authorized to perform under state law. 
 
Certifications and recertifications must be signed by the physician responsible 
for the case, or by another physician who has knowledge of the case and who 
is authorized to do so by the responsible physician or by the hospital’s 
medical staff (or by the dentist as provided in 42 CFR 424.11 and 
42 CFR 
424.13).  CMS considers only the following physicians, podiatrists or dentists 
to have sufficient knowledge of the case to serve as the certifying physician:  
the admitting physician of record (“attending”) or a physician on call for him 
or her; a surgeon responsible for a major surgical procedure on the beneficiary 
or a surgeon on call for him or her; a dentist functioning as the admitting 
physician of record or as the surgeon responsible for a major dental procedure; 
and, in the specific case of a non‐physician non‐dentist admitting practitioner 
who is licensed by the state and has been granted privileges by the facility, a 
physician member of the hospital staff (such as a physician member of the 
utilization review committee) who has reviewed the case and who also enters 
into the record a complete certification statement that specifically contains all 
of the content elements discussed above.  The admitting physician of record 
may be an emergency department physician or hospitalist.  CMS does not 
require the certifying physician to have inpatient admission privileges at the 
hospital. 
 
4. Format:  As specified in 42 CFR 424.11, no specific procedures or forms are 
required for certification and recertification statements.  The provider may 
adopt any method that permits verification.  The certification and 
recertification statements may be entered on forms, notes, or records that the 
appropriate individual signs, or on a special separate form.  Except as 
provided for delayed certifications, there must be a separate signed statement 
for each certification or recertification.  If all the required information is 
included in progress notes, the physician's statement could indicate that the 
individual's medical record contains the information required and that hospital 
inpatient services are or continue to be medically necessary. 
 
--- page 13 ---
B. Inpatient Order:  A Medicare beneficiary is considered an inpatient of a hospital 
if formally admitted as an inpatient pursuant to an order for inpatient admission 
by an ordering practitioner.  As stated in the FY 2014 IPPS Final Rule
, 78 FR 
50908 and 50941, and as conveyed in 42 CFR 482.24, if the order is not properly 
documented in the medical record prior to discharge, the hospital should not 
submit a claim for Part A payment.  Meeting the two midnight benchmark does 
not, in itself, render a beneficiary an inpatient or serve to qualify them for 
payment under Part A.  Rather, as provided in Medicare regulations, a beneficiary 
is considered an inpatient (and Part A payment may only be made) if they are 
formally admitted as such pursuant to an order for inpatient admission by an 
ordering practitioner. 
 
With regard to the time of discharge, a Medicare beneficiary is considered a 
patient of the hospital until the effectuation of activities typically specified by the 
ordering practitioner as having to occur prior to discharge (e.g., “discharge after 
supper” or “discharge after voids”).  Thus, discharge itself can but does not 
always coincide exactly with the time that the discharge order is written, rather it 
occurs when the ordering practitioner’s order for discharge is effectuated. 
 
1. Content:  The ordering practitioner’s order contains the instruction that the 
beneficiary should be formally admitted for hospital inpatient care.  The order 
must specify admission for inpatient services.  Inpatient rehabilitation 
facilities (IRFs) must adhere to the admission requirements specified in 
42 
CFR 412.622.  The two midnight benchmark does not apply in IRFs. 
 
2. Qualifications of the ordering/admitting practitioner:  The order must be 
furnished by a physician or other practitioner (“ordering practitioner”) who is:  
(a) licensed by the state to admit inpatients to hospitals, (b) granted privileges 
by the hospital to admit inpatients to that specific facility, and (c) 
knowledgeable about the patient’s hospital course, medical plan of care, and 
current condition at the time of admission.  See section (B)(3) for a discussion 
of the requirements to be knowledgeable about the patient’s hospital course.  
The ordering practitioner makes the determination of medical necessity for 
inpatient care and renders the admission decision.  The ordering practitioner is 
not required to write the order but must authenticate (sign, or in the case of an 
initial order (under (B)(2)(a)) or a verbal order (under (B)(2)(b)), countersign) 
the order reflecting that he or she has made the decision to admit the patient 
for inpatient services. 
 
The admission decision (order) may not be delegated to another individual 
who is not authorized by the state to admit patients, or has not been granted 
admitting privileges by the hospital's medical staff.  However, a medical 
resident, physician assistant, nurse practitioner, or other non-physician 
practitioner may act as a proxy for the ordering practitioner provided they are 
authorized under state law to admit patients and the requirements outlined 
below are met (FY 14 IPPS Final Rule and 42 CFR 412.3(b)
). 
--- page 14 ---
 
a. Residents and non-physician practitioners authorized to make initial 
admission decisions - Certain non-physician practitioners and residents 
working within their residency program are authorized by the state in 
which the hospital is located to admit inpatients, and are allowed by 
hospital by-laws or policies to do the same.  The ordering practitioner may 
allow these individuals to write inpatient admission orders on his or her 
behalf, if the ordering practitioner approves and accepts responsibility for 
the admission decision by authenticating (countersigning) the order prior 
to discharge.  (See (A)(2) for guidance regarding the definition of 
discharge time and (B)(3) for more guidance regarding knowledge of a 
patient’s hospital course).  In authenticating (countersigning) the order, the 
ordering practitioner approves and accepts responsibility for the admission 
decision.  This process may also be used for practitioners (such as 
emergency department physicians) who do not have admitting privileges 
but are authorized by the hospital to issue temporary or “bridge” inpatient 
admission orders. 
 
b. Verbal orders- At some hospitals, individuals who lack the authority to 
admit inpatients under state laws and hospital by‐laws (such as a 
registered nurse) may nonetheless enter the inpatient admission order as a 
verbal order.  In these cases, the ordering practitioner directly 
communicates the inpatient admission order to staff as a verbal (not 
standing) order, and the ordering practitioner need not separately record 
the order to admit.  Following discussion with and at the direction of the 
ordering practitioner, a verbal order for inpatient admission may be 
documented by an individual who is not qualified to admit patients in his 
or her own right, as long as that documentation (transcription) of the order 
for inpatient admission is in accordance with state law including; scope‐
of‐practice laws, hospital policies, and medical staff bylaws, rules, and 
regulations.  In this case, the staff receiving the verbal order must 
document the verbal order in the medical record at the time it is received.  
The order must identify the ordering practitioner and must be 
authenticated (countersigned) by the ordering practitioner promptly and 
prior to discharge.  Example:  “Admit to inpatient per Dr. Smith” would 
be considered an acceptable method of identifying the ordering 
practitioner and would meet the verbal order requirement if the verbal 
order (1) is appropriately documented in the medical record by the 
individual receiving the verbal order when the order is received; and (2) is 
authenticated (countersigned) by Dr. Smith promptly, prior to discharge. 
 
c. Standing orders and protocols - The inpatient admission order cannot be 
a standing order.  While Medicare’s rules do not prohibit use of a protocol 
or algorithm that is part of a protocol, only the ordering practitioner, or a 
resident or other practitioner acting on his or her behalf under section 
--- page 15 ---
(B)(2)(a) can make and take responsibility for the inpatient admission 
decision. 
 
d. Commencement of inpatient status - Inpatient status begins at the time 
of formal admission by the hospital pursuant to the order, including an 
initial order (under (B)(2)(a)) or a verbal order (under (B)(2)(b)) that is 
authenticated (countersigned) timely, by authorized individuals, as 
required in this section.  If the practitioner responsible for authenticating 
(countersigning) an initial order or verbal order does not agree that 
inpatient admission was appropriate or valid (including an unauthorized 
verbal order), he or she should not authenticate (countersign) the order and 
the beneficiary is not considered to be an inpatient.  The hospital stay may 
be billed to Part B as a hospital outpatient encounter. 
 
3. Knowledge of the patient’s hospital course: CMS considers only the 
following practitioners to have sufficient knowledge about the beneficiary’s 
hospital course, medical plan of care, and current condition to serve as the 
ordering practitioner: the admitting physician of record (“attending”) or a 
physician on call for him or her, primary or covering hospitalists caring for the 
patient in the hospital, the beneficiary’s primary care practitioner or a 
physician on call for the primary care practitioner, a surgeon responsible for a 
major surgical procedure on the beneficiary or a surgeon on call for him or 
her, emergency or clinic practitioners caring for the beneficiary at the point of 
inpatient admission, and other practitioners qualified to admit inpatients and 
actively treating the beneficiary at the point of the inpatient admission 
decision.  A utilization review committee physician functioning in that role 
does not have direct responsibility for the care of the patient and is therefore 
not considered to be sufficiently knowledgeable to order the inpatient 
admission.  The order must be written by one of the above practitioners 
directly involved with the care of the beneficiary, and a utilization committee 
physician may only write the order to admit if he or she is not acting in a 
utilization review capacity and fulfills one of the direct patient care roles, such 
as the attending physician.  Utilization review may not be conducted by any 
individual who was professionally involved in the care of the patient whose 
case is being reviewed (42 CFR 482.30(d)(3)
). 
 
4. Timing:  The order must be furnished at or before the time of the inpatient 
admission.  The order can be written in advance of the formal admission (e.g., 
for a pre‐scheduled surgery), but the inpatient admission does not occur until 
hospital care services are provided to the beneficiary.  Conversely, in the 
unusual case in which a patient is admitted as an inpatient prior to an order to 
admit and there is no documented verbal order, the inpatient stay should not 
be considered to commence until the inpatient admission order is documented.  
CMS does not permit retroactive orders.  Authentication by the ordering 
practitioner of the order (either by signature or, in the case of an initial order 