
--- page 1 ---
 
 
110 - Glossary 
(Rev. 12423; Issued: 12-20-23; Effective: 01-01-24; Implementation: 01-02-24)  
  
Adjudicator – The entity responsible for making the decision at any level of the Medicare claim 
decision making process, from initial determination to the final level of appeal, on a specific claim.  
  
Administrative Law Judge (ALJ) – Adjudicator employed by the Department of Health and Human 
Services (HHS), Office of Medicare Hearings and Appeals (OMHA) that holds hearings and issues 
decisions related to level 3 of the appeals process.  
  
Affirmation - A term used to denote that a prior claims determination has been upheld by the current 
claims adjudicator. Although appeals through the OMHA level are de novo, CMS and its contractors 
often use this term when an adjudicator reaches the same conclusion as that in the prior determination, 
even though he/she is not bound by the prior determination.  
  
Amount in Controversy (AIC) - The dollar amount required to be in dispute to establish the right to a 
particular level of appeal.  Congress establishes the amount in controversy requirements.  
  
Appeals Council – The Medicare Appeals Council (herein Appeals Council), a division within the  
Departmental Appeals Board, provides the final level of administrative review of claims for entitlement 
to Medicare and individual claims for Medicare coverage and payment. (See also Departmental Appeals 
Board.)  
  
Appellant - The term used to designate the party (i.e., the beneficiary, provider, supplier, or other person 
showing an interest in the claim determination) or the representative of the party that has filed an appeal.  
The adjudicator determines if a particular appellant is a proper party or representative of a proper party.  
  
Applicable plan – Applicable plan means liability insurance (including self-insurance), no-fault 
insurance, or a workers' compensation law or plan.  
  
Appointed representative – The individual appointed by a party to represent the party in a Medicare 
claim or claim appeal.  
  
Assignee – (1) With respect to the assignment of a claim for items or services, the assignee is the 
supplier who has furnished items or services to a beneficiary and has accepted a valid assignment of a 
claim;  
  
OR  
  
(2) With respect to an assignment of appeal rights, an assignee is a provider or supplier who is not 
already a party to an appeal, who has furnished items or services to a beneficiary, and has accepted a 
valid assignment of the right to appeal a claim executed by the beneficiary.  
  
Assignment of appeal rights – The transfer by a beneficiary of his or her right to appeal under the 
claims appeal process to a provider or supplier who is not already a party, and who provided the items or 
services to the beneficiary.  
  
Assignor – A beneficiary whose provider of service or supplier has taken assignment of a claim, or 
assignment of an appeal of a claim.  
  
--- page 2 ---
Attorney Adjudicator - A licensed attorney employed by OMHA with knowledge of Medicare 
coverage and payment laws and guidance, authorized to take the actions provided for in 42 CFR 405 
subpart I on requests for ALJ hearing and requests for reviews of QIC dismissals.  
  
Authorized representative – An individual authorized under State or other applicable law to act on 
behalf of a beneficiary or other party involved in the appeal. The authorized representative will have all 
of the rights and responsibilities of a beneficiary or party, as applicable, throughout the appeals process.  
  
Beneficiary – Individual who is enrolled to receive benefits under Medicare Part A and/or Part B.  
  
Contractor - An entity that contracts with the Federal government to review and/or adjudicate claims, 
determinations and/or decisions.  
  
Date of Receipt – A determination, decision or notice is presumed to have been received by the party 
five days from the date included on the determination or decision, unless there is evidence to the 
contrary.  
  
NOTE:  Throughout Chapter 29, reference to day or days means calendar days unless otherwise 
specified.  
  
Departmental Appeals Board (DAB) Review - The DAB provides impartial, independent review of 
disputed decisions in a wide range of Department of Health and Human Services programs under more 
than 60 statutory provisions.  The Medicare Appeals Council (herein Appeals Council), a division within 
the Departmental Appeals Board, provides the final level of administrative review of claims for 
entitlement to Medicare and individual claims for Medicare coverage and payment. (See section 340 in 
this chapter.)  
  
De Novo - Latin phrase meaning “anew” or “afresh,” used to denote the manner in which claims are 
adjudicated in the administrative appeals process.  Adjudicators at each level of appeal make a new, 
independent and thorough evaluation of the claim(s) at issue, and are not bound by the findings and 
decision made by an adjudicator in a prior determination or decision.  
  
Decisions and Determinations -If a Medicare appeal request does not result in a dismissal, adjudication 
of the appeal results in either a “determination” or “decision.”  There is no apparent practical distinction 
between these two terms although applicable regulations use the terms in distinct contexts.  
  
A decision that is reopened and thereafter revised is called a “revised determination.”  
  
Dismissal - An action taken by an adjudicator when an appeal will not be conducted as requested.  A 
request for appeal may be dismissed for any number of reasons, including:  
  
1. Abandonment of the appeal by the appellant;  
2. A request is made by the appellant to withdraw the appeal;  
3. A determination that an appellant is not a proper party;  
4. The amount in controversy requirements have not been met; and  
5. The appellant has died and no one else is prejudiced by the claims determination.  
  
Limitation on Liability Determination- Section 1879 of the Social Security Act (the Act) provides 
financial relief to beneficiaries, providers and suppliers by permitting Medicare payment to be made, or 
requiring refunds to be made, for certain services and items for which Medicare coverage and payment 
would otherwise be denied. This section of the Act is referred to as “the limitation on liability 
provision.” Both the underlying coverage determination and the limitation on liability determination 
may be challenged. For more detailed information see chapter 30 of this manual.   
--- page 3 ---
  
Medicare number and/or Medicare beneficiary identifier (Mbi) - are general terms describing a 
beneficiary’s Medicare identification number.  Medicare beneficiary identifier references both the Health 
Insurance Claim Number (HICN) and the Medicare Beneficiary Identifier (MBI) during the new 
Medicare card transition period and after for certain business areas that will continue to use the HICN as 
part of their processes.  For the beneficiary population, the term Medicare number is used to describe the 
Medicare beneficiary identifier (Mbi).  
  
 Office of Medicare Hearings and Appeals (OMHA) - The Office of Medicare Hearings and Appeals 
is responsible for level 3 of the Medicare claims appeal process and certain Medicare entitlement 
appeals and Part B premium appeals.  At level 3 of the appeals process, an appellant may have a hearing 
before an OMHA ALJ, or review by an attorney adjudicator.  
  
Party - A person and/or entity normally understood to have standing to appeal an initial determination 
and/or a subsequent administrative appeal determination or decision. (See section 210 in this chapter.)  
  
Provider of services (herein provider) – As used in this section, the definition in 42 CFR 405.902 for 
provider applies.  Provider means a hospital, a critical access hospital (CAH), a skilled nursing facility, a 
comprehensive outpatient rehabilitation facility, a home health agency, or a hospice that has in effect an 
agreement to participate in Medicare, or a clinic, a rehabilitation agency, or a public health agency that 
has in effect a similar agreement but only to furnish outpatient physical therapy or speech pathology 
services, or a community mental health center that has in effect a similar agreement but only to furnish 
partial hospitalization or intensive outpatient services.  NOTE: A non-participating provider, that is, an 
entity eligible to enter into a provider agreement to participate in Medicare but has not entered into such 
an agreement, is not considered a provider of services and does not have party status for an initial 
determination or appeal.  
  
Qualified Independent Contractor (QIC) – Entity that contracts with the Secretary in accordance with 
the Act to perform level 2 appeals, which are called reconsiderations, and expedited reconsiderations.  
  
Remand – An action taken by an adjudicator to vacate a lower level appeal decision, or a portion of the 
decision, and return the case, or a portion of the case, to that level for a new decision.  
  
Reopening - See IOM 100-04 Chapter 34.  
  
Reversal - Although appeals in the administrative appeals process are de novo proceedings (i.e., a new 
determination/decision is made at each level), Medicare uses this term where the new 
determination/decision is more favorable to the appellant than the prior determination/decision, even if 
some aspects of the prior determination/decision remain the same.  
  
NOTE: The term reversal describes the coverage determination, not the liability determination. For  
example, an item or service may be determined to be non-covered as not medically reasonable and 
necessary (under section 1862(a)(1)(A) of the Act), but Medicare may, nevertheless, make payment for 
the item or service if the party is found not financially liable after applying the limitation on liability 
provision (section 1879 of the Act).  Thus, the coverage determination is affirmed, but Medicare makes 
payment as required by statute.  
  
Revised Determination or Decision - An initial determination or decision that is reopened and which 
results in the issuance of a revised determination or decision.  A revised determination or decision is 
considered a separate and distinct determination or decision and may be appealed. For example, a 
postpayment review of an initial determination that results in a reversal of a previously covered/paid 
claim (and, potentially, a subsequent overpayment determination) constitutes a reopening and a revised 
initial determination.  The first level of appeal following a revised initial determination is a 
--- page 4 ---
redetermination. Spouse - The word “spouse” as used in this chapter, and as used in sections 405.952, 
405.972, 405.1052, and 405.1114 of title 42 of the Code of Federal Regulations (CFR) regarding the 
dismissal of an appeal includes same-sex spouses as well as opposite-sex spouses.  The relationship of 
two individuals of the same sex will be recognized as a marriage if either (1) the state or territory in 
which the individuals live recognizes their relationship as a marriage, or (2) the individuals entered into 
a legally valid marriage under the law of any state, territory, or foreign jurisdiction.  Because civil unions 
and domestic partnerships are not marriages, civil union and domestic partners are not regarded as 
spouses by CMS.  
  
Supplier –Unless the context otherwise requires, a physician or other practitioner, a facility, or entity 
(other than a provider of services) that furnishes items or services under Medicare.  
  
Vacate – To set aside a previous action.  
 
200 - CMS Decisions Subject to the Administrative Appeals Process 
(Rev. 12423; Issued: 12-20-23; Effective: 01-01-24; Implementation: 01-02-24)  
 
  
A. Entitlement Determinations  
  
In accordance with a memorandum of understanding with the Secretary, the Social Security 
Administration (SSA) makes initial Part A and Part B entitlement determinations and initial 
determinations on applications for entitlement.  Individuals should contact the SSA for administrative 
appeals involving entitlement (telephone 1-800-772-1213 (TTY 1-800-325-0778 or access the SSA’s 
website at: http://ssa.gov/pgm/medicare.htm).  This would include issues that involve the question of 
whether the beneficiary:  
  
• Has attained age 65 or is entitled to Medicare benefits under the disability or renal disease 
provisions of the law;  
  
• Is entitled to a monthly retirement, survivor, or disability benefit;  
  
• Is qualified as a railroad beneficiary;  
  
• Met the deemed insured provisions; and  
  
• Met the eligibility requirements for enrollment under the supplementary medical insurance 
(SMI) program or for hospital insurance (HI) obtained by premium payment.  
  
If a beneficiary is dissatisfied with the SSA’s initial determination on entitlement, he or she may request 
a reconsideration with the SSA.  The SSA performs a reconsideration of its initial determination in 
accordance with 20 CFR part 404, subpart J.  Following the reconsideration, the beneficiary may request 
a hearing before a HHS Administrative Law Judge (ALJ).  If the beneficiary obtains a hearing before an 
ALJ and is dissatisfied with the decision of the ALJ, he or she may request the Appeals Council to 
review the case.  Following the action of the Appeals Council, the beneficiary may be entitled to file suit 
in Federal district court.  
  
B.  Initial Determinations 
 
  
The Medicare contractor makes initial determinations regarding claims for benefits under Medicare Part 
A and Part B.  A finding that a request for payment does not meet the requirements for a Medicare claim 
--- page 5 ---
shall not be considered an initial determination.  An initial determination for purposes of this chapter 
includes, but is not limited to, determinations with respect to:  
  
(1) Whether the items and/or services furnished are covered under title XVIII of the Act;  
  
(2) In the case of determinations on the basis of section 1879(b) or (c) of the Act, whether the 
beneficiary, or supplier who accepts assignment under 42 CFR 424.55 knew, or could 
reasonably have been expected to know at the time the services were furnished, that the 
services were not covered;  
  
(3) In the case of determinations on the basis of section 1842(l)(1) of the Act, whether the 
beneficiary or supplier knew, or could reasonably have been expected to know at the time 
the services were furnished, that the services were not covered;  
  
(4) Whether the deductible has been met;  
  
(5) The computation of the coinsurance amount;  
  
(6) The number of days used for inpatient hospital, psychiatric hospital, or post-hospital 
extended care;  
  
(7) Periods of hospice care used;  
  
(8) Requirements for certification and plan of treatment for physician services, durable medical 
equipment, therapies, inpatient hospitalization, skilled nursing care, home health, hospice, 
partial hospitalization services, and intensive outpatient services;  
  
(9) The beginning and ending of a spell of illness, including a determination made under the 
presumptions established under 42 CFR 409.60(c)(2), and as specified in 42 CFR 
409.60(c)(4);  
  
(10) The medical necessity of services, or the reasonableness or appropriateness of placement of 
an individual at an acute level of patient care made by the Quality Improvement 
Organization (QIO) on behalf of the contractor in accordance with 42 CFR 476.86(c)(1);  
  
(11) Any other issues having a present or potential effect on the amount of benefits to be paid 
under Part A or Part B of Medicare, including a determination as to whether there has been 
an underpayment of benefits paid under Part A or Part B, and if so, the amount thereof;  
  
(12) If a waiver of adjustment or recovery under sections 1870(b) and (c) of the Act is 
appropriate:  
  
(i) when an overpayment of hospital insurance benefits or supplementary 
medical insurance benefits (including a payment under section 1814(e) of the Act) has 
been made with respect to an individual, or  
  
(ii) with respect to a Medicare Secondary Payer recovery claim against a 
beneficiary or against a provider or supplier;  
  
(13) Whether a particular claim is not payable by Medicare based upon the application of the 
Medicare Secondary Payer provisions of section 1862(b) of the Act;  
  
--- page 6 ---
(14) Under the Medicare Secondary Payer provisions of section 1862(b) of the Act that 
Medicare has a recovery claim against a provider, supplier, or beneficiary for services or 
items that have already been paid by the Medicare program, except when the Medicare 
Secondary Payer recovery claim against the provider or supplier is based upon failure to 
file a proper claim as defined in 42 CFR part 411 because this action is a reopening;  
  
(15) A claim not payable to a beneficiary for the services of a physician who has opted-out. 
NOTE: A physician who has opted-out of Medicare is not considered a party to the initial 
determination or any subsequent appeal; and  
    
(16) Under the Medicare Secondary Payer provisions of section 1862(b) of the Act that 
Medicare has a recovery claim if Medicare is pursuing recovery directly from an applicable 
plan. That is, there is an initial determination with respect to the amount and existence of 
the recovery claim.  
  
C.  Actions That Are Not Initial Determinations  
  
Actions that are not initial determinations and are not appealable under this chapter include, but are not 
limited to—  
  
(1) Any determination for which CMS has sole responsibility, for example: whether an entity meets 
the conditions for participation in the program; whether an independent laboratory meets the 
conditions  
for coverage of services; or a determination under the Medicare Secondary Payer provisions of 
section 1862(b) of the Act of the debtor for a particular recovery claim;  
  
(2) The coinsurance amounts prescribed by regulation for outpatient services under the prospective 
payment system;  
  
(3) Any issue regarding the computation of the payment amount of program reimbursement of 
general applicability for which CMS or a contractor has sole responsibility under Part B, such as 
the establishment of a fee schedule set forth in 42 CFR, part 414, subpart B, or an inherent 
reasonableness adjustment pursuant to 42 CFR  405.502(g) and any issue regarding the cost 
report settlement process under Part A:  
  
NOTE: For example, section 1848(i)(1) of the Act prohibits administrative and judicial review of the 
individual components used to compute Medicare physician fee schedule payment amounts.  However, a 
payment amount determination with respect to a particular item or service on a claim is an initial 
determination that is appealable.  
  
(4) Whether an individual's appeal meets the qualifications for expedited access to judicial review 
provided in 42 CFR 405.990;  
  
(5) Any determination regarding whether a Medicare overpayment claim should be compromised, 
or collection action terminated or suspended under the Federal Claims Collection Act of 1966, 
as amended;  
  
(6) Determinations regarding the transfer or discharge of residents of skilled nursing facilities in 
accordance with 42 CFR 483.5 (definition of transfer and discharge) and 483.15;  
  
(7) Determinations regarding the readmission screening and annual resident review processes 
required by 42 CFR part 483, subparts C and E;  
  
--- page 7 ---
(8) Determinations with respect to a waiver of Medicare Secondary Payer recovery under section 
1862(b) of the Act;  
  
(9) Determinations with respect to a waiver of interest;  
  
(10) Determinations for a finding regarding the general applicability of the Medicare Secondary 
Payer provisions (as opposed to the application in a particular case);  
  
(11) Determinations under the Medicare Secondary Payer provisions of section 1862(b) of the Act 
that Medicare has a recovery against an entity that was or is required or responsible (directly, as 
an insurer or self-insurer; as a third party administrator; as an employer that sponsors, 
contributes to or facilitates a group health plan or a large group health plan; or otherwise) to 
make payment for services or items that were already reimbursed by the Medicare program, 
except with respect to the amount and existence of a recovery claim under section 1862(b) of 
the Act where Medicare is pursuing recovery directly from an applicable plan as specified in 42 
CFR 405.924(b)(16);  
  
(12) A contractor's, QIC's, ALJ's, OMHA attorney adjudicator’s, or Appeals Council’s determination 
or decision to reopen or not to reopen an initial determination, redetermination, reconsideration, 
hearing decision, or review decision;  
  
(13) Determinations that CMS or its contractors may participate in the proceedings on a request for 
an ALJ hearing or act as parties in an ALJ hearing or Appeals Council review;  
  
(14) Determinations that a provider or supplier failed to submit a claim timely or failed to submit a 
timely claim despite being requested to do so by the beneficiary or the beneficiary’s subrogee;  
  
(15) Determinations with respect to whether an entity qualifies for an exception to the electronic 
claims submission requirement under 42 CFR part 424;  
  
(16) Determinations by the Secretary of sustained or high levels of payment errors in accordance 
with section 1893(f)(3)(B);  
  
(17) A contractor's prior determination related to coverage of physicians' services;  
  
(18) Requests for anticipated payment under the home health prospective payment system under 42 
CFR 409.43(c)(ii)(s); and  
  
(19) Claim submissions on forms/formats that are incomplete, invalid, or do not meet the 
requirements of a Medicare claim and returned or rejected to the provider or supplier.  
  
NOTE: Duplicate items and services are not afforded appeal rights, unless the supplier is appealing 
whether or not the service was, in fact, a duplicate.  
  
D.  Initial Determinations Subject to Reopening  
  
Minor errors or omissions in an initial determination may be corrected only through the contractor’s 
reopening process.  Since it is neither cost efficient or necessary for contractors to correct clerical errors 
through the appeals process, requests for adjustments to claims resulting from clerical errors must be 
handled and processed as reopenings.  In situations where a provider, supplier, or beneficiary requests 
an appeal and the issue involves a minor error or omission, irrespective of the request for an appeal, 
contractors shall treat the request as a request for reopening.  A contractor must transfer the appeal 
request to the reopenings unit or other designated unit for processing. See Chapter 34 Section 10.1 
--- page 8 ---
Authority to Conduct a Reopening of the Medicare Claims Processing Manual for information specific 
to conducting a reopening when a redetermination was requested.  
 
210 - Who May Appeal 
(Rev. 4380, Issued: 08-30-19, Effective: 07-08-19, Implementation: 10- 01-19) 
 
A person or entity with a right to appeal an initial determination is considered a party to the redetermination 
(as described in 42 CFR 405.906), referred to in the remainder of these instructions as a "party." 
 
Parties to the initial determination include: 
 
• Beneficiaries, who are almost always considered parties to a Medicare determination, as they are 
entitled to appeal any initial determination (unless the beneficiary has assigned his or her appeal 
rights); 
 
• Providers who file a claim for items or services furnished to a beneficiary.  NOTE: A non-
participating provider, that is, an entity eligible to enter into a provider agreement to participate in 
Medicare but has not entered into such an agreement, is not considered a provider or provider of 
service and does not have party status for an initial determination or appeal.  Beneficiaries are 
parties to claims filed for services furnished by a non-participating provider; 
 
• Participating suppliers and non-participating suppliers, but only with respect to items or services 
furnished to a beneficiary that are billed on an assignment-related basis; 
 
• An applicable plan (as defined in §110) with respect to the amount and existence of a recovery 
claim under §405.924(b)(16) if Medicare is pursuing recovery directly from the applicable plan.  
The applicable plan is the sole party to an initial determination under §405.924(b)(16) and any 
subsequent appeal. 
 
Parties to the redetermination and subsequent appeal levels include: 
 
• The parties to the initial determination, above; 
 
NOTE:  In addition to his/her own right to appeal Medicare’s decision regarding an initial determination, a 
beneficiary is a party to any request for redetermination filed by a provider or supplier.  The beneficiary is 
always a party to an appeal of services rendered on their behalf, at any level (except when the beneficiary 
has assigned his/her appeal rights to a provider or supplier). 
 
• A nonparticipating supplier has the same rights to appeal the contractor’s determination in an 
unassigned claim for medical equipment and supplies if the contractor denies payment on the basis 
of §1862(a)(1), §1834(a)(17)(B), §1834(j)(1), or §1834(a)(15) of the Act as a nonparticipating or 
participating supplier has in assigned claims.  These rights of appeal also extend to determinations 
that a refund is required either because the supplier knew or should have known that Medicare 
would not pay for the item or service (See §1834(j)(4)), or because the beneficiary was not properly 
informed in writing with an Advanced Beneficiary Notice of Non Coverage (ABN) that Medicare 
would not pay or was unlikely to pay for the item or service. While the time limits in §310 apply 
for filing requests for redetermination, refunds must be made within the time limits specified in 
Chapter 30.  An adverse advance determination of coverage under  §1834(a)(15) of the Act is not an 
initial determination on a claim for payment for items furnished and, therefore, is not appealable; 
 
• A non-participating physician not billing on an assigned basis but who may be responsible for 
making a refund to the beneficiary under §1842(l)(1) of the Act for services furnished to a 
beneficiary that are denied on the basis of section 1862(a)(1) of the Act, has party status with 
respect to the claim at issue; 
 
--- page 9 ---
• A provider or supplier who otherwise does not have the right to appeal may appeal when the 
beneficiary dies and there is no other party available to appeal.  See §210.1 for information on 
determining whether there is another party available to appeal; 
 
• A Medicaid State agency or party authorized to act on behalf of the State. Medicaid State agencies 
have party status at the redetermination level (and subsequent levels) for claims for items or 
services involving a beneficiary who is enrolled to receive benefits under both Medicare and 
Medicaid, but only if the Medicaid State agency has made payment for, or may be liable for such 
items or services, and only if the State agency has filed a timely request for redetermination for 
such items or services.  (See 42 CFR 405.908); and 
 
• Any individual whose rights with respect to the particular claim being reviewed may be affected by 
such review and any other individual whose rights with respect to supplementary medical insurance 
benefits may be prejudiced by the decision (e.g., an individual or entity liable for payment under 42 
CFR subpart E §424.60 in the case of a deceased beneficiary). 
 
Neither the contractor nor CMS is considered a party to an appeal at the redetermination or reconsideration 
levels, and therefore does not have the right to appeal or to participate as a party at this stage in the 
administrative appeals process.  CMS or a contractor may choose to participate in an ALJ hearing, become a 
party to an ALJ hearing (with CMS’ approval), or may recommend that the Administrative QIC (AdQIC) 
refer an ALJ decision or dismissal to the Appeals Council for review under its own motion review authority.  
At times, an ALJ may ask for a contractor’s or QIC’s input to a hearing.  This does not change the 
contractor’s party status. 
 
NOTE: While a representative may request an appeal on behalf of the party that he/she represents, the 
representative is not a party to the appeal solely by virtue of being a representative.  (See §270 for the rights 
and responsibilities of a representative.) The provider of the item or service denied may represent the 
individual, but may not impose any financial liability on the individual in connection with such 
representation.  If limitation on liability is involved, the provider of the item or service may represent the 
individual only if the provider waives any rights for payment from the individual with respect to the services 
or items involved in the appeal. 
 
210.1 - Provider or Supplier Appeals When the Beneficiary is Deceased 
(Rev. 695, Issued:  10-07-05; Effective:  05-01-05; Implementation:  01-09-06) 
 
When a provider or supplier appeals on behalf of a deceased beneficiary and the provider or supplier 
otherwise does not have the right to appeal, the MAC must determine whether another party is available to 
appeal by taking either of the following actions: 
 
• The MAC may send a letter to the last known address of the beneficiary, or to the beneficiary's 
estate, if known.  The letter should advise the beneficiary's estate (or anyone taking responsibility for the 
deceased's bills for medical or other health services) of the right to appeal the claim denial.  The letter also 
should provide information that the provider or supplier wishes to appeal.  The letter should provide the 
beneficiary's estate with the following three options: 
 
o Option 1: I wish to appeal this claim. 
 
o Option 2: I am not available to appeal, please process the provider's appeal and let me know   
of the result. 
 
o Option 3: I am available to appeal, but do not wish to exercise my right to appeal. 
 
The MAC should allow the estate at least 10 days to respond, or the remainder of the time frame for 
requesting an appeal -- whichever is greater.  If the estate does not respond in the allotted time frame, the 
MAC should annotate the file that no other party is available to appeal and continue to process the provider's 
--- page 10 ---
or supplier's appeal.  If the estate responds that it is available and wishes to appeal, the MAC should 
continue with the appeal and notify the provider or supplier of the results.  If the estate indicates that it is not 
available to appeal, then the MAC should continue to process the appeal and notify the beneficiary's estate 
of the decision.  If the estate indicates that it is available, but does not want to appeal, the MAC should 
dismiss the provider or supplier's request on the basis that there is another party available, even though the 
party does not intend to pursue the appeal; or  
 
The MAC may send a letter to the provider or supplier to request written confirmation that they are not 
aware of any other party available to appeal.  The MAC should allow the provider or supplier 10 days to 
provide confirmation.  If the MAC does not receive written confirmation within 15 days, it should dismiss 
the appeal on the basis that the provider or supplier did not confirm that there was no other party available to 
appeal. 
 
220 - Steps in the Appeals Process:  Overview 
(Rev. 4278, Issued: 04-12-19, Effective: 06-13-19, Implementation: 06-13-19) 
 
Regulations at 42 CFR 405.940-405.942 provide that a party to a redetermination that is dissatisfied with an 
initial determination may request that the contractor make a redetermination. The request for redetermination 
must be filed within 120 days after the date of receipt of the notice of the initial determination (the notice of 
initial determination is presumed to be received 5 days after the date of the notice unless there is evidence to 
the contrary). Contractors cannot accept an appeal for which no initial determination has been made. The 
parties specified in §210 who are dissatisfied with a determination on their Part A or B claim have appeal 
rights. 
 
The appeals process consists of five levels. The appellant must begin the appeal at the first level after 
receiving an initial determination. Each level, after the initial determination, has procedural steps the 
appellant must take before appealing to the next level. Each level is discussed in detail in subsequent 
sections. If the appellant meets the procedural steps at a specific level (including the amount in controversy 
(AIC) requirement if applicable), the appellant (and all other parties to the appeal decision) is then afforded 
the right to appeal any determination or decision to the next level in the process. The appellant may exercise 
the right to appeal any determination or decision to the next higher level, until appeal rights are exhausted. 
Although there are five distinct levels in the Medicare appeals process, the redetermination, level 1, is the 
only level in the appeals process that the contractor performs. 
 
When an appellant requests a reconsideration with a QIC (level 2), the contractor must prepare and forward 
the case file to the QIC.  Further, the contractor may have effectuation responsibilities for decisions made by 
the QIC. The contractor, however, does not have responsibility for reviewing the QIC’s decision for 
accuracy. When an appellant requests an Administrative Law Judge (ALJ) hearing or review by an attorney 
adjudicator (level 3), the QIC must prepare and forward the case file to the OMHA.  Further, the contractor 
may have effectuation responsibilities for decisions made at OMHA, Departmental Appeals Board 
(DAB)/Appeals Council, and Federal Court levels. 
 
In the chart below, levels 1 – 4 are part of the Administrative Appeals Process. If an appellant has completed 
all the first 4 steps of the administrative appeals process and is still dissatisfied, the appellant may appeal to 
the Federal courts, provided the appellant satisfies the requirements for obtaining judicial review. 
  
--- page 11 ---
CHART 1 - The Medicare Fee-for-Service Appeals Process 
 
APPEAL LEVEL TIME LIMIT FOR FILING 
REQUEST 
MONETARY 
THRESHOLD TO BE MET 
1. Redetermination 120 days from date of receipt 
of the notice initial 
determination 
None 
2. Reconsideration 180 days from date of receipt 
of the redetermination* 
None 
3. Administrative Law 
Judge (ALJ) Hearing 
60 days from the date of 
receipt of the reconsideration 
Current AIC requirements can be 
found on CMS.gov at: 
http://www.cms.gov/Medicare/Ap
peals-and-
Grievances/OrgMedFFSAppeals/
HearingsALJ.html. 
 
See §250 for additional 
information. 
4. Departmental 
Appeals Board (DAB) 
Review/Appeals 
Council 
60 days from the date of 
receipt of the ALJ hearing 
decision 
None 
5. Federal Court 
Review 
60 days from date of receipt 
of the Appeals Council 
decision 
Current AIC requirement can be 
found on CMS.gov at: 
http://www.cms.gov/Medicare/Ap
peals-and-
Grievances/OrgMedFFSAppeals/
Review-Federal-District-
Court.html.  See §345 for 
additional information 
 
*NOTE: If a party requests QIC review of a contractor’s dismissal of a request for redetermination, the time 
limit for filing a request for reconsideration is 60 days from the date of receipt of the contractor’s dismissal 
notice. 
 
230 - Where to Appeal 
(Rev. 4380, Issued: 08-30-19, Effective: 07-08-19, Implementation: 10- 01-19) 
 
Where a party must file an appeal depends on the level of appeal.  The chart below indicates where 
appellants should file appeal requests for each level of appeal. 
 
CHART 2 - Where to File an Appeal 
 
LEVEL WHERE TO FILE AN APPEAL 
  
Part A* 
 
Part B 
 
DME 
 
Redetermination 
 
MAC 
 
MAC 
 
MAC 
--- page 12 ---
LEVEL WHERE TO FILE AN APPEAL 
 
Reconsideration 
 
QIC 
 
QIC 
 
QIC 
 
ALJ Hearing 
 
HHS OMHA Central 
Operations 
 
 
HHS OMHA Central 
Operations 
 
 
HHS OMHA Central 
Operations 
 
 
Appeals Council 
Review 
 
Appeals Council 
 
Appeals Council 
 
Appeals Council 
 
*Includes part B claims filed with the Part A Medicare Administrative Contractor (MAC). 
 
240 - Time Limits for Filing Appeals & Good Cause for Extension of the Time Limit 
for Filing Appeals 
(Rev. 4278, Issued: 04-12-19, Effective: 06-13-19, Implementation: 06-13-19) 
 
A. Time Limits for Each Level of Appeal 
The time limits for filing appeals vary according to the type of appeal: 
 
• Redetermination - The time limit for filing a request for redetermination is 120 days from the 
date of receipt of the Medicare Summary Notice (MSN) or Remittance Advice (RA).  See §240.1-
240.5 for clarifications and exceptions to this rule.) 
 
• QIC Reconsideration - The time limit for filing a request for reconsideration is 180 days from the 
date of receipt of the notice of the redetermination.  If a party requests QIC review of a MAC’s 
dismissal of a request for redetermination, the time limit for filing is 60 days from the date of receipt 
of the MAC’s dismissal notice. 
 
• ALJ Hearing - The time limit for filing a request for an ALJ hearing is 60 days from the date of 
receipt of the reconsideration notice. 
 
• Appeals Council Review - The time limit for filing a request for review by the Appeals Council is 
60 days from the date of receipt of the ALJ’s or attorney adjudicator’s decision. 
 
• Judicial Review - The time limit for filing for judicial review is 60 days from the date of the 
Appeals Council's decision. 
 
A request filed with the A/B MAC (A), (B), (HHH), or DME MAC is considered to have been filed as of the 
date the MAC received it.  The MAC computes the time limit for requesting a redetermination by allowing 5 
additional days beyond the time limit (120 days for a redetermination) from the date of the previous notice.  
This allows a 5-day period for mail delivery.  The MAC allows for additional time if there is evidence that 
the mail delivery was longer than 5 days. 
 
NOTE: When the beneficiary preference is to have all documents converted into an accessible format, 
MACs shall make allowances for additional delivery time of the accessible format. The MAC shall also 
provide allowance for a delayed response as a result of a beneficiary having sought and received help from 
an auxiliary resource (such as a SHIP or senior center), on account of his or her disability, in order to be able 
to file an appeal (also see §240.2).  
 
When the filing deadline for a redetermination ends on a Saturday, Sunday, legal holiday, or any other 
nonwork day, the MAC shall apply a rollover period that extends the filing deadline to the first working day 
--- page 13 ---
after the Saturday, Sunday, legal holiday, or other nonwork day.  For example, if the filing deadline for a 
redetermination falls on the Saturday before Columbus Day, the filing deadline is extended to the first 
working day after the Columbus Day holiday. 
 
These time limits may be extended if good cause for late filing is shown.  (See §240.1-240.5.)  When a 
redetermination request appears to be filed late, the MAC makes a finding of good cause using the 
guidelines in §240.2 through §240.4 before taking any other action on the appeal.  
 
B. Extension of Time Limit for Filing a Request for Redetermination 
 
The time limit for filing a request for redetermination may be extended in certain situations.  Generally, 
providers, physicians or other suppliers are expected to file appeal requests on a timely basis.  A re quest 
from a provider, physician, or other supplier to extend the period for filing the request for redetermination 
should not be routinely granted and such requests warrant careful examination.  For a beneficiary request, 
more lenience should be given. 
 
Upon request by the party that has missed the filing deadline, the A/B MAC (A), (B), (HHH), or DME MAC 
may extend the period for filing the request for redetermination.  The procedures for finding good cause to 
excuse late filing are discussed below. 
 
240.1 - Good Cause 
(Rev. 4278, Issued: 04-12-19, Effective: 06-13-19, Implementation: 06-13-19) 
 
If an appeal request is filed late, the applicable MAC may extend the time limit for filing an appeal if good 
cause is shown.  The MAC resolves the issue of whether good cause exists before taking any other action on 
the appeal.  Whenever a MAC makes a finding for good cause for late filing, the MAC shall document the 
reason for that finding in the redetermination decision letter.  If no decision letter is issued (i.e., a decision 
fully favorable to the appellant is made, which currently does not require issuance of a redetermination 
decision letter), then the reason the MAC found that good cause exists for late filing shall be documented in 
the redetermination case file. 
 
NOTE:  A finding by the MAC that good cause exists for late filing for the redetermination does not mean 
that the party is then excused from the timely filing rules for the reconsideration. 
 
240.2 - Conditions and Examples That May Establish Good Cause for Late Filing by 
Beneficiaries 
(Rev. 4278, Issued: 04-12-19, Effective: 06-13-19, Implementation: 06-13-19) 
 
A.  Conditions 
 
Good cause may be found when the record clearly shows, or the beneficiary alleges, that the delay in filing 
was due to one of the following: 
 
• Circumstances beyond the beneficiary’s control, including mental or physical impairment 
(e.g., disability, extended illness) or significant communication difficulties; 
 
• Incorrect or incomplete information about the subject claim and/or appeal was furnished by official 
sources (CMS, the contractor, or the Social Security Administration) to the beneficiary (e.g., a party 
is not notified of her appeal rights or a party receives inaccurate information regarding a filing 
deadline); 
 
NOTE:  Whenever a beneficiary is not notified of his/her appeal rights or of the time limits for 
filing, good cause must be found. 
 
--- page 14 ---
• Delay resulting from efforts by the beneficiary to secure supporting evidence, where the beneficiary 
did not realize that the evidence could be submitted after filing the request; 
 
• When destruction of or other damage to the beneficiary’s records was responsible for the delay in 
filing (e.g., a fire, natural disaster); 
 
• Unusual or unavoidable circumstances, the nature of which demonstrates that the beneficiary could 
not reasonably be expected to have been aware of the need to file timely; 
 
• Serious illness which prevented the party from contacting the contractor in person, in writing, 
or through a friend, relative, or other person; 
 
• A death or serious illness in his or her immediate family;  
 
• A request was sent to a Government agency in good faith within the time limit, and the request did 
not reach the appropriate contractor until after the time period to file a request expired; or 
 
• Delay due to additional time required to produce the beneficiary’s Medicare documents (such as an 
MSN) in an accessible format (e.g., large print, Braille, etc.); 
  
• Delay as the result of an individual having sought and received help from an auxiliary resource (such 
as a SHIP or senior center), due to his or her disability, in order to be able to file the appeal. 
 
B.  Examples 
 
Following are examples of cases where good cause for late filing is found.  This list is illustrative only and 
not all-inclusive: 
 
• Beneficiary was hospitalized and extremely ill, causing a delay in filing; 
 
• Beneficiary is deceased.  Her husband, as representative of the beneficiary’s estate, died during 
the appeals filing period.  Request was then filed late by the deceased husband’s executor; 
 
• The denial notice sent to the beneficiary did not specify the time limit for filing for the 
redetermination; and 
 
• The request was received after, but close to, the last day to file, and the beneficiary claims that the 
request was submitted timely. 
 
240.3 - Conditions and Examples That May Establish Good Cause for Late Filing by 
Providers, Physicians, or Other Suppliers 
(Rev. 4278, Issued: 04-12-19, Effective: 06-13-19, Implementation: 06-13-19) 
 
In general, A/B MACs (A), (B), (HHH), and DME MACs should not routinely find good cause when a 
provider, physician or other supplier submits an untimely appeal request.  However, good cause may be 
found when the record clearly shows, or the provider, physician or other supplier alleges and the record 
does not negate, that the delay in filing was due to one of the following: 
 
• Incorrect or incomplete information about the subject claim and/or appeal was furnished by 
official sources (CMS, the MACs, or the Social Security Administration) to the provider, 
physician, or other supplier; or 
 
• Unavoidable circumstances that prevented the provider, physician, or other supplier from timely 
filing a request for redetermination.  Unavoidable circumstances encompass situations that are 
--- page 15 ---
beyond the provider, physician or supplier’s control, such as major floods, fires, tornados, and other 
natural catastrophes. 
 
NOTE:  Failure of a billing company or other consultant (that the provider, physician, or other supplier has 
retained) to timely submit appeals or other information is NOT grounds for finding good cause for late 
filing.  The MAC does not find good cause where the provider, physician, or other supplier claims that lack 
of business office management skills or expertise caused the late filing. 
 
240.4 – Good Cause - Administrative Relief Following a Disaster 
(Rev. 4380, Issued: 08-30-19, Effective: 07-08-19, Implementation: 10- 01-19) 
 
When a disaster occurs, whether natural or man-made, MACs shall anticipate both an increased demand for 
emergency and other health care services, and a corresponding disruption to normal health care delivery 
systems and networks.  For appeals purposes, as defined in this IOM, a ‘disaster area’ is declared by the 
Federal Emergency Management Agency (FEMA).  In disaster situations, MACs that process appeals for 
beneficiaries, providers, and suppliers affected by a disaster shall exercise good cause in accordance with the 
regulations and follow the guidance below regarding how to process Fee-for-Service appeal requests in an 
area(s) declared by FEMA as a disaster area. 
   
When a Presidential declaration occurs, the HHS Secretary may, under section 319 of the Public Health 
Service Act, declare that a Public Health Emergency (PHE) exists in the affected State.  Once a PHE is 
declared, section 1135 of the Social Security Act authorizes the Secretary, among other things, to 
temporarily modify or waive certain Medicare, Medicaid, CHIP, and HIPAA requirements as determined 
necessary by CMS. 
 
A. Definition of Disaster  
 
A disaster is defined as any natural or man-made catastrophe (such as hurricane, tornado, earthquake, 
volcanic eruption, mudslide, snowstorm, tsunami, terrorist attack, bombing, fire, flood, or explosion) which 
causes damage of sufficient severity and magnitude to partially or completely destroy medical records and 
associated documentation that could be needed and/or requested by the MACs in the course of the 
adjudication process, interrupts normal mail service (including US Postal delivery, overnight parcel delivery 
services, etc.), impacts ability to file appeals in a timely manner, and/or otherwise significantly limit the 
provider’s/supplier's daily operations.  
 
A disaster may be widespread and impact multiple structures (e.g., a regional flood) or isolated and impact a 
single site only (e.g., water main failure).  The fact that a provider/supplier is located in a presidentially 
declared disaster area under the power of the Stafford Act is not sufficient in itself to justify administrative 
relief, as not all structures in the disaster area may have been subject to the same amount of damage.  
Damage must be of sufficient severity and extent to compromise retrieval of medical records.  The 
provider/supplier needs to state that they were impacted by the disaster.  
B. Basis for Providing Administrative Relief 
 
In the event of a disaster, MACs shall grant temporary administrative relief to any affected providers and 
suppliers for up to 6 months (or longer with good cause).  Administrative relief is to be granted to 
providers/suppliers/beneficiaries on a case-by-case basis in accordance with the following guidelines:  
 
1. Situation: A provider/supplier/beneficiary in the affected area needs an extension to file a 
request for an appeal.  
Action: The MAC shall grant an extension to request an appeal under the good cause 
exception.  Please see 42 CFR § 405.942.  If the request is related to an overpayment, the 
MAC shall accept the request and stop recoupment immediately.  
2. Situation: The MAC has requested or needs to request additional documentation for a 
pending appeal, but the provider/supplier/beneficiary has been impacted by a disaster.  
--- page 16 ---
 
Action: The MAC shall hold the request until the documentation can be obtained or 
submitted.  However, to the extent that the contractor can use other data sources that are 
available to substantiate payment for the claim, it should do so.  The CMS will waive the 
timeliness requirements for processing these appeals.  
 
3. Situation: A request for an appeal filed by an appointed representative on behalf of a 
party contains a missing or defective appointment instrument and the party is in the 
affected area.  
Action: The contractor shall process the request and attempt to obtain the corrected 
appointment instrument.  If the corrected appointment instrument is not received by the 
end of the appeals adjudication period, contractors shall send the redetermination decision 
letter to the appellant party and any other party to the appeal, but not to the individual 
attempting to act as the representative.  
4. Situation: A MAC receives a request for redetermination from a 
provider/supplier/beneficiary in the affected area and the request is missing some of the 
required elements to make it a valid request.  However, the MAC has information in the 
shared systems that would allow it to identify the missing element(s).  
 
Action: The MAC shall accept and process the request, using information already 
available to it via the shared system.   
 
C. Verification
  
In the case of complete destruction of medical records where no backup records exist, MAC Appeal Units 
and QICs shall accept an attestation that no medical records exist and consider the services covered and 
correctly coded. 
 
240.5 - Procedures to Follow When a Party Fails to Establish Good Cause 
(Rev. 4278, Issued: 04-12-19, Effective: 06-13-19, Implementation: 06-13-19) 
 
If a party files an untimely request for redetermination and there is insufficient or no explanation for the 
delay or no other evidence that establishes the reason for late filing, the MAC dismisses the redetermination 
request.  The MAC explains in the dismissal letter that the party can:  1) request that the MAC vacate the 
dismissal by providing an explanation for the late filing to the MAC within 6 months of the dismissal of the 
redetermination request; and 2) request that the QIC review the MAC’s dismissal action by filing a request 
with the QIC within 60 days of the date of receipt of the dismissal notice. 
 
If an explanation or other evidence is submitted within 6 months from the dismissal that contains sufficient 
evidence or other documentation that supports a finding of good cause for late filing, the MAC (as 
applicable) makes a favorable good cause determination.  Once it makes a favorable good cause 
determination, it considers the appeal to be timely filed and proceeds to vacate its prior dismissal and 
performs a redetermination (see §310.6.3 Processing Requests to Vacate Dismissals). 
 
The closed date is the date of the dismissal, and the dismissal is reported on the Contractor Reporting of 
Operational Workload Data (CROWD) in the appropriate appeals report forms (Carriers Appeals Report 
Form CMS-2590, Monthly Intermediary Part A and Part B Appeals Report Form CMS-2591, or Monthly 
Statistical Report on Intermediary and Carrier Part A and Part B Appeals Activity Form CMS-2592).  The 
closed date and date of dismissal are also captured in the Medicare Appeals System (MAS) and can be 
appropriately reported on by the Part A MACs. 
 
 
 
 
--- page 17 ---
250 - Amount in Controversy (AIC) Requirements 
(Rev. 2729, Issued: 06-21-13, Effective: 07-23-13, Implementation:07-23-13) 
 
This section is informational only since the amount in controversy requirements only apply to the ALJ and 
Federal court levels. 
 
Section 1869 (b)(1)(E) of the Act established amount in controversy threshold amounts for ALJ hearing 
requests and judicial review at $100 and $1,000, respectively.  As amended by section 940 of the MMA, this 
amount will be adjusted annually.  In order to continue an appeal following the QIC reconsideration level, a 
party must have an amount remaining in controversy that meets the threshold requirements. 
 
250.1 - Amount in Controversy General Requirements 
(Rev. 4380, Issued: 08-30-19, Effective: 07-08-19, Implementation: 10- 01-19) 
 
Each calendar year, the dollar threshold for the AIC requirement for ALJ hearing requests or judicial review 
will be recalculated to reflect the percentage increase in the medical care component of the consumer price 
index for all urban consumers (U.S. city average) for July 2003 to the July preceding the year involved. Any 
amount that is not a multiple of $10 will be rounded to the nearest multiple of $10.  Changes to the amount 
in controversy threshold amounts are published annually in the Federal Register as per 42 CFR 405.1006(b).  
Current AIC amounts, along with a link to the current Federal Register AIC Notice, can be found on the 
CMS.gov website at: https://www.cms.gov/Medicare/Appeals -and-
Grievances/OrgMedFFSAppeals/OMHA -ALJ-Hearing.html 
 
250.2 - Principles for Determining Amount in Controversy 
(Rev. 4278, Issued: 04-12-19, Effective: 06-13-19, Implementation: 06-13-19) 
 
As part of the requirements for a hearing or review before OMHA, a party to a proceeding must meet the 
AIC provisions at 42 CFR 405.1006, including the threshold amount, as adjusted, in accordance with 42 
CFR 405.1006(b).   
 
The AIC is computed as the actual amount charged the individual for the items and services in question, reduced 
by 
 
(a) Any Medicare payments already made or awarded for the items or services; and 
 
(b) Any deductible and coinsurance amounts that may be collected for the items or services. 
 
In such cases where payment is made for items or services under section 1879 of the Act or under 42 CFR 
411.400 or the liability of the beneficiary is limited under 42 CFR411.402, the AIC is computed as the 
amount that the beneficiary would have been charged for the items or services in question if those expenses 
were not paid under 42 CFR 411.400 or that the liability was not limited under 42 CFR 411.402, reduced by 
any deductible and coinsurance amounts that may be collected for the items or services. 
 
When a matter involves a provider or supplier termination of Medicare-covered items or services that is 
disputed by a beneficiary, and the beneficiary did not elect to continue receiving the items or services, the 
amount in controversy is calculated in accordance with 42 CFR 405.1006(d)(1), except that the amount 
charged to the individual and any deductible and coinsurance that may be collected for the items or services 
are calculated using the amount the beneficiary would have been charged if the beneficiary had received the 
items or services the beneficiary asserts should have been covered based on the beneficiary's current 
condition, and Medicare payment were not made for the items or services. 
 
When an appeal involves an identified overpayment, the amount in controversy is the amount of the 
overpayment specified in the demand letter for the items or services in the disputed claim. When an appeal 
involves an estimated overpayment amount determined through the use of statistical sampling and 