
--- page 1 ---
50 - Form CMS-R-131 Advance Beneficiary Notice of Noncoverage 
(ABN) 
(Rev. 1587, Issued: 09-05-08, Effective: 03-03-08, Implementation: 03-01-09) 
 
50.1 - Introduction - General Information 
(Rev. 2782, Issued: 09-06-13, Effective: 12-09-13, Implementation: 12-09-13) 
 
Section 50 of the Medicare Claims Processing Manual establishes the standards for use 
by providers and suppliers (including laboratories) in implementing the Advance 
Beneficiary Notice of Noncoverage (ABN), Form CMS-R-131.  This section provides 
--- page 2 ---
instructions regarding the notice issued by providers to beneficiaries in advance of 
providing what they believe to be noncovered items or services.  The ABN must meet all 
of the standards found in Chapter 30.  
 
ABN - Quick Glance Guide1 
 
Notice Name:  Advance Beneficiary Notice of Noncoverage (ABN) 
Notice Number:  Form CMS-R-131 
Issued by:  Providers and suppliers of Medicare Part B items and services; 
Hospice and Religious Non-medical HealthCare Institute (RNHCI) providing Medicare Part A items 
and services; and home health agencies(HHAs) for Part A and Part B items and services  
 
Recipient:  Original Medicare (fee for service) beneficiary  
Additional Information:   
 The ABN, Form CMS-R-131 replaces the following notices:  
• ABN-G 
• ABN-L 
• Notice of Exclusion of Medicare Benefits (NEMB) 
• Home Health Advance Beneficiary Notice of Noncoverage (HHABN), Form CMS-R-296, 
Option Box 1  (effective 2013) 
Type of 
notice: 
Must be issued: Timing of notice:  Optional/Voluntary 
use: 
 
Financial 
liability 
notice  
 
• Prior to providing an item or service that 
is usually paid for by Medicare under Part 
B (or under Part A for hospice, HHA, and 
RNHCI providers only) but may not be 
paid for in this particular case because it 
is not considered medically reasonable 
and necessary 
• Prior to providing custodial care 
• For hospice providers, prior to caring for 
a patient who is not terminally ill 
• For DME suppliers, additional situations 
requiring issuance are outlined in 50.3.1 
• For HHA providers, prior to providing 
care when the individual is not confined 
to the home or does not need intermittent 
skilled nursing care. 
 
Prior to delivery of the item or 
service in question. Provide 
enough time for the beneficiary 
to make an informed decision 
on whether or not to receive the 
service or item in question and 
accept potential financial 
liability. 
 
 
Yes.  Prior to providing 
an item or service that 
is never covered by 
Medicare (not a 
Medicare benefit).  
 
 
 
50.2 - General Statutory Authority - Financial Liability Protection 
Provisions (FLP) of Title XVIII 
(Rev. 2480, Issued: 06-01-12, Effective: 09-04-12, Implementation: 09-04-12) 
 
The Financial Liability Protection provisions (FLP) of the Social Security Act (the Act) 
protect beneficiaries, health care providers and suppliers under certain circumstances 
                                                 
1  This is an abbreviated reference tool and is not meant to replace or supersede any of the directives contained in Section 50.  
 
--- page 3 ---
from unexpected liability for charges associated with claims that Medicare does not pay. 
The FLP provisions include: 
 
• Limitation On Liability (LOL) under §1879(a)-(g) of the Act; 
 
• Refund Requirements (RR) for Non-assigned Claims for Physicians Services 
under §1842(l) of the Act; and 
 
• Refund Requirements (RR) for Assigned and Non-assigned Claims for 
Medical Equipment and Supplies under §§1834(a)(18), 1834(j)(4), and 
1879(h) of the Act. 
 
Additional information on the FLP provisions can be found in Sections 10 and 20 of this 
chapter. 
 
50.2.1 - Applicability to Limitation On Liability (LOL) 
(Rev. 2480, Issued: 06-01-12, Effective: 09-04-12, Implementation: 09-04-12) 
 
The Limitation On Liability (LOL) protections of §1879 of the Act apply only when a 
provider believes that a Medicare covered item or service may be denied in a particular 
instance because it is not reasonable and necessary under §1862(a)(1) of the Act or 
because the item or service constitutes custodial care under §1862(a)(9) of the Act. §1879 
of the Act requires a provider to notify a beneficiary in advance when s/he believes that 
items or services will likely be denied either as not reasonable and necessary or as 
constituting custodial care. If such notice (in the form of an ABN or as otherwise noted in 
§40.2) is not given, providers may not shift financial liability to beneficiaries for these 
items or services if Medicare denies the claim.  Beneficiaries are afforded LOL protection 
when items or services are denied for reasons listed in §50.3.1. 
 
50.2.2 - Compliance with Limitation On Liability Provisions 
(Rev. 2480, Issued: 06-01-12, Effective: 09-04-12, Implementation: 09-04-12) 
 
A healthcare provider/supplier (herein also referred to as a “notifier”) who fails to 
comply with the ABN instructions risks financial liability and/or sanctions. LOL 
provisions shall apply as required by law, regulations, rulings and program instructions. 
Additionally, when authorized by law and regulations, sanctions under the Conditions of 
Participation (COPs) may be imposed. 
 
The Medicare contractor will hold any provider who either failed to give notice when 
required or gave defective notice financially liable. A notifier who can demonstrate that 
s/he did not know and could not reasonably have been expected to know that Medicare 
would not make payment will not be held financially liable for failing to give notice. 
However, a notifier who gave defective notice may not claim that s/he did not know or 
could not reasonably have been expected to know that Medicare would not make 
payment as the issuance of the notice (albeit defective) is clear evidence of knowledge. 
See §50.12 for Refund Requirements. 
 
--- page 4 ---
50.3 - ABN Scope 
(Rev. 2782, Issued: 09-06-13, Effective: 12-09-13, Implementation: 12-09-13) 
 
The ABN is an Office of Management and Budget (OMB)-approved written notice issued 
by providers and suppliers for items and services provided under Medicare Part B, 
including hospital outpatient services, and certain care provided under Part A (hospice 
and religious non-medical healthcare institutes only). Providers and suppliers who are not 
enrolled in Medicare cannot issue the ABN to beneficiaries.  
 
Provider use of the ABN has expanded to include home health agency (HHA) issuance 
for Part A and Part B items and services.  The ABN will replace the Home Health 
Advance Beneficiary Notice (HHABN), Form CMS-R-296, Option Box 1 issued by HHAs.  
The mandatory date for HHAs to use the ABN instead of the HHABN, Option Box 1 will 
be posted on the web link for home health notices found at 
http://www.cms.gov/Medicare/Medicare-General-Information/BNI/index.html
. 
Information specific to HHA use of the ABN has been added in §50.15.4. The guidelines 
for ABN use published in this section and the ABN form instructions apply to HHAs 
unless noted otherwise. 
 
The ABN is given to beneficiaries enrolled in the Medicare Fee-For-Service (FFS) 
program.  It is not used for items or services provided under the Medicare Advantage 
(MA) Program or for prescription drugs provided under the Medicare Prescription Drug 
Program (Part D).  The ABN is used to fulfill both mandatory and voluntary notice 
functions. 
 
The ABN replaces the following notices: 
 
• ABN-G (CMS-R-131-G) 
• ABN-L (CMS-R-131-L) 
• NEMB (CMS-20007) 
• Home Health Advance Beneficiary Notice of Noncoverage (HHABN), Form CMS-
R-296, Option Box 1  (effective 2013) 
 
Skilled Nursing Facilities (SNFs) issue the ABN for Part B services only. The Skilled 
Nursing Facility Advance Beneficiary Notice of Noncoverage (SNFABN), CMS Form 
10055, is issued for Part A SNF items and services. Section 70 of this chapter contains 
information on SNFABN issuance. 
 
50.3.1 - Mandatory ABN Uses 
(Rev. 2782, Issued: 09-06-13, Effective: 12-09-13, Implementation: 12-09-13) 
 
The following provisions necessitate delivery of the ABN: 
 
• §1862(a)(1) of the Act (not reasonable and necessary); 
 
--- page 5 ---
• §1834(a)(17)(B) of the Act (violation of the prohibition on unsolicited telephone 
contacts); 
 
• §1834(j)(1) of the Act (medical equipment and supplies supplier number 
requirements not met); 
 
• §1834(a)(15) of the Act (medical equipment and/or supplies denied in advance); 
 
• §1862(a)(9) of the Act (custodial care); 
 
• §1879(g)(2) of the Act (hospice patient who is not terminally ill); or 
 
• §1879(g)(1) of the Act (home health services requirements are not met – not 
confined to the home or no need for intermittent skilled nursing care). 
 
• §1833(g)(5) of the Act (when outpatient therapy services are in excess of therapy 
cap amounts and don’t qualify for a therapy cap exception – effective January 1, 
2013). 
 
When Medicare considers an item or service experimental (e.g., a “Research Use Only” 
or “Investigational Use Only” laboratory test), payment for the experimental item or 
service is denied under §1862(a)(1)
 of the Act as not reasonable and necessary. In 
circumstances such as this, the beneficiary must be given an ABN.  
 
Expanded mandatory ABN use in 2011 
 
The Patient Protection and Affordable Care Act, P.L. 111-148, §4103(d)(1)(C) added a 
new subparagraph (P) to 1862(a)(1)of the Act. Per §1862(a)(1)(P), Medicare covered 
personalized prevention plan services (as defined in section 1861(hhh)(1)) that are 
performed more frequently than indicated per coverage guidelines are not reasonable and 
necessary for the diagnosis or treatment of illness or injury or to improve the functioning 
of a malformed body member. The LOL provisions of §1879 apply to this new 
subparagraph; thus, providers must issue an ABN prior to providing a preventative 
service that is usually covered by Medicare but will not be covered in this instance 
because frequency limitations have been exceeded.  
 
In addition, delivery of an ABN is mandatory under 42 CFR §414.408(e)(3)(ii) when a 
noncontract supplier furnishes an item included in the Durable Medical Equipment, 
Prosthetic, Orthotics, and Supplies (DMEPOS) Competitive Bidding Program (CBP) for 
a Competitive Bidding Area (CBA). Although all other denial reasons triggering 
mandatory use of the ABN are found in §1879 of the Act, in this situation, 
§1847(b)(5)(D) of the Act permits use of the ABN with respect to these items and 
services. 
 
50.3.2 - Voluntary ABN Uses 
(Rev. 2480, Issued: 06-01-12, Effective: 09-04-12, Implementation: 09-04-12) 
--- page 6 ---
 
ABNs are not required for care that is either statutorily excluded from coverage under 
Medicare (i.e. care that is never covered) or most care that fails to meet a technical 
benefit requirement (i.e. lacks required certification). However, the ABN can be issued 
voluntarily in place of the Notice of Exclusion from Medicare Benefits (NEMB) for care 
that is never covered such as: 
 
• Care that fails to meet the definition of a Medicare benefit as defined in §1861 
of the Social Security Act; 
 
• Care that is explicitly excluded from coverage under §1862 of the Social 
Security Act.  Examples include: 
 
° Services for which there is no legal obligation to pay; 
° Services paid for by a government entity other than Medicare (this 
exclusion does not include services paid for by Medicaid on behalf of 
dual-eligibles); 
° Services required as a result of war; 
° Personal comfort items; 
° Routine eye care; 
° Dental care; and 
° Routine foot care. 
 
The voluntary ABN serves as a courtesy to the beneficiary in forewarning him/her of 
impending financial obligation. When an ABN is used as a voluntary notice, the 
beneficiary should not be asked to choose an option box or sign the notice. The provider 
or supplier is not required to adhere to the issuance guidelines for the mandatory notice 
(as set forth below) when using the ABN for voluntary notification. 
 
NOTE:  Certain DME items/services that fail to meet a technical requirement may 
require an ABN as outlined in the mandatory use section above. 
 
50.4 - Issuance of the ABN 
(Rev. 1587, Issued: 09-05-08, Effective: 03-03-08, Implementation: 03-01-09) 
 
50.4.1 - Issuers of ABNs (Notifiers) 
(Rev. 2782, Issued: 09-06-13, Effective: 12-09-13, Implementation: 12-09-13) 
 
Entities who issue ABNs are collectively known as “notifiers”. These entities can 
include physicians, practitioners, providers (including laboratories), and suppliers, and/or 
utilization review committees for the care provider.  In 2013, HHAs are added as ABN 
issuers. 
 
--- page 7 ---
The notifier may direct an employee or a subcontractor to deliver an ABN.  The billing 
entity will always be held responsible for effective delivery regardless of who gives the 
notice. When multiple entities are involved in rendering care, it is not necessary to give 
separate ABNs.  Either party involved in the delivery of care can be the notifier when: 
 
• There are separate “ordering” and “rendering” providers (e.g. a physician orders a 
lab test and an independent laboratory delivers the ordered tests); 
 
• One provider delivers the “technical” and the other the “professional” component 
of the same service ( e.g. a radiological test that an independent diagnostic testing 
facility renders and a physician interprets); or  
 
• The entity that obtains the signature on the ABN is different from the entity that 
bills for services (e.g. when one laboratory refers a specimen to another laboratory 
which then bills Medicare for the test). 
 
When the notifier is not the billing entity, the notifier must know how to direct the 
beneficiary who received the ABN to the billing entity for questions and should annotate 
the Additional Information section of the ABN with this information. It is permissible to 
enter the names of more than one entity in the header of the notice. 
 
50.4.2.-Recipients of the ABN 
(Rev. 2480, Issued: 06-01-12, Effective: 09-04-12, Implementation: 09-04-12) 
 
Notifiers are required to give an ABN to a FFS Medicare beneficiary or his/her 
representative before providing him/her with a Medicare covered item or service that may 
not be covered in this particular instance or before providing custodial care. Recipients of 
ABNs include beneficiaries who have Medicaid coverage in addition to Medicare (i.e. 
dual-eligible). A notifier’s inability to give notice to a beneficiary or his/her 
representative does not allow the notifier to shift financial liability to the beneficiary. 
Note: See §§40.3.4.6 and 50.6.5.B in this chapter for information on beneficiary refusals. 
 
50.4.3 - Representatives of Beneficiaries 
(Rev. 2782, Issued: 09-06-13, Effective: 12-09-13, Implementation: 12-09-13) 
 
Notifiers are responsible for determining who may act as a beneficiary’s authorized 
representative for the purposes of ABN issuance under applicable State or other law.  An 
individual who may make health care and financial decisions on a beneficiary’s behalf 
(e.g. the beneficiary’s legal guardian or someone appointed according to a properly 
executed “durable medical power of attorney”) is an authorized representative.  If the 
beneficiary has a known, legally authorized representative, the ABN must be issued to 
the existing representative.  If a beneficiary does not have a representative and one is 
necessary, a representative may be appointed for purposes of receiving notice following 
CMS guidelines and as permitted by State and Local law.  See §40.3.5 of this chapter for 
more detailed guidance on representatives. 
 
--- page 8 ---
When a representative is signing the ABN on behalf of a beneficiary, the ABN should be 
annotated to identify that the signature was penned by the “rep” or “representative”.  If 
the representative’s signature is not clearly legible, the representative’s name should be 
printed on the ABN. 
 
50.5 - ABN Triggering Events 
(Rev. 2480, Issued: 06-01-12, Effective: 09-04-12, Implementation: 09-04-12) 
 
Notifiers are required to issue ABNs when an item or service is expected to be denied 
based on one of the provisions in §50.3.1. This may occur at any one of three points 
during a course of treatment which are initiation, reduction, and termination, also known 
as “triggering events”. 
 
A.  Initiations 
 
An initiation is the beginning of a new patient encounter, start of a plan of care, or 
beginning of treatment. If a notifier believes that certain otherwise covered items or 
services will be noncovered (e.g. not reasonable and necessary) at initiation, an ABN 
must be issued prior to the beneficiary receiving the non-covered care. 
 
Example: Mrs. S. asks her physician for an EKG because her sister was recently 
diagnosed with atrial fibrillation. Mrs. S. has no diagnosis that warrants medical necessity 
of an EKG but insists on having an EKG even if she has to pay out of pocket for it. The 
physician’s office personnel issue an ABN to Mrs. S. before the EKG is done. 
 
B.  Reductions 
 
A reduction occurs when there is a decrease in a component of care (i.e. frequency, 
duration, etc.). The ABN is not issued every time an item or service is reduced. But, if a 
reduction occurs and the beneficiary wants to receive care that is no longer considered 
medically reasonable and necessary, the ABN must be issued prior to delivery of this 
noncovered care. 
 
Example: Mr. T , is receiving outpatient physical therapy five days a week, and after 
meeting several goals, therapy is reduced to three days per week. Mr. T wants to achieve 
a higher level of proficiency in performing goal related activities and wants to continue 
with therapy 5 days a week. He is willing to take financial responsibility for the costs of 
the 2 days of therapy per week that are no longer medically reasonable and necessary.  
An ABN would be issued prior to providing the additional days of therapy weekly. 
 
C.  Terminations 
 
A termination is the discontinuation of certain items or services. The ABN is only issued 
at termination if the beneficiary wants to continue receiving care that is no longer 
medically reasonable and necessary. 
 
--- page 9 ---
Example: Ms. X has been receiving covered outpatient speech therapy services, has met 
her treatment goals, and has been given speech exercises to do at home that do not 
require therapist intervention.  Ms. X wants her speech therapist to continue to work with 
her even though continued therapy is not medically reasonable or necessary. Ms. X is 
issued an ABN prior to her speech therapist resuming therapy that is no longer considered 
medically reasonable and necessary. 
 
50.6 - ABN Standards 
(Rev. 1587, Issued: 09-05-08, Effective: 03-03-08, Implementation: 03-01-09) 
 
50.6.1 - Proper Notice Documents 
(Rev. 2782, Issued: 09-06-13, Effective: 12-09-13, Implementation: 12-09-13) 
 
The ABN, Form CMS-R-131, is the Office of Management and Budget (OMB) 
approved standard notice. Failure to use this notice as mandated could result in the 
notice being invalidated and/or the notifier being held liable for the items or services 
in question. 
 
The online replicable copies of the OMB approved ABN (CMS-R-131) and instructions 
for notice completion are available on the CMS website at:  
http://www.cms.gov/Medicare/Medicare-General-Information/BNI/ABN.html
 
 
A.  Language Choice 
 
The ABN is available in English and Spanish under a dedicated link on the web page 
given above.  Notifiers should choose the appropriate version of the ABN based on the 
language the beneficiary best understands. Insertions must be in English when the 
English language ABN is used.  Similarly, when a Spanish language ABN is used, the 
notifier should make insertions on the notice in Spanish, if applicable.  In addition, verbal 
assistance in other languages may be provided to assist beneficiaries in understanding the 
document.  However, the printed document is limited to the OMB-approved English and 
Spanish versions.  Notifiers should document any types of translation assistance that are 
used in the “Additional Information” section of the notice. 
 
B.  Effective Versions 
 
ABNs are effective as of the OMB approval date given at the bottom of each notice.  The 
routine approval is for 3-year use. Notifiers are expected to exclusively use the current 
version of the ABN.  Providers/suppliers must be attentive to the OMB approval date on 
the notice and seek instruction from the CMS website 
http://www.cms.gov/Medicare/Medicare-General-Information/BNI/index.html
 on 
obtaining current versions of notices.  CMS will allow a transition period for providers 
and suppliers to switch from using expiring notices to newly approved notices.  The date 
of mandatory use of newly approved notices will be announced on the CMS website with 
the notice’s release. 
 
 
--- page 10 ---
50.6.2 - General Notice Preparation Requirements 
(Rev. 2480, Issued: 06-01-12, Effective: 09-04-12, Implementation: 09-04-12) 
 
The following are the general instructions that notifiers must follow in preparing an ABN 
for mandatory use: 
 
A.  Number of Copies:  A minimum of two copies, including the original, must be made 
so the beneficiary and notifier each have one. The notifier should retain the original 
whenever possible. 
 
B.  Reproduction:  Notifiers may reproduce the ABN by using self-carbonizing paper, 
photocopying, digitized technology, or another appropriate method. All reproductions 
must conform to applicable form and manual instructions. 
 
C.  Length and Size of Page:  The ABN form must not exceed one page in length; 
however, attachments are permitted for listing additional items and services.  If 
attachments are used, they must allow for clear matching of the items or services in 
question with the reason and cost estimate information. The ABN is designed as a letter-
sized form. If necessary, it may be expanded to a legal-sized page. 
 
D.  Contrast of Paper and Print:  A visually high-contrast combination of dark ink on a 
pale background must be used. Do not use reversed print (i.e. white print on black paper), 
or block-shaded (highlighted) text. 
 
E.  Font:  To the extent practicable, the fonts as they appear in the ABN downloaded 
from the CMS web site should be used. Any changes in the font type must be based 
solely on limitations of the notifier’s software and/or hardware. In such cases, notifiers 
should use alternative fonts that are easily readable, such as Arial, Arial Narrow, Times 
New Roman, and Courier. Font style and formatting must be maintained regardless of 
font type used.  
 
Any other changes to the font, such as italics, embossing, bold, etc., should not be used 
since they can make the ABN more difficult to read. The font size generally should be 12 
point. Titles should be 14-16 point, but insertions in blanks of the ABN can be as small as 
10 point if needed. 
 
Information inserted by notifiers in the blank spaces on the ABN may be typed or legibly 
hand-written. 
 
F.  Customization:  Notifiers are permitted to do some customization of ABNs, such as 
pre-printing information in certain blanks to promote efficiency and to ensure clarity for 
beneficiaries. Notifiers may develop multiple versions of the ABN specialized to 
common treatment scenarios, using the required language and general formatting of the 
ABN. Blanks (G)-(I) must be completed by the beneficiary or his/her representative when 
the ABN is issued and may never be pre-filled. Lettering of the blanks (A-J) should be 
removed prior to issuance of an ABN.  
 
--- page 11 ---
If pre-printed information is used to describe items/services and/or common reasons for 
noncoverage, the notifier must clearly indicate on the ABN which portions of the pre-
printed information are applicable to the beneficiary. For example, pre-printed items or 
services that are inapplicable may be crossed out, or applicable items/services may be 
checked off.   
 
Providers who pre-print a menu of items or services may wish to list a cost estimate 
alongside each item or service.  For example, notifiers may merge the items/service 
section (Blank D) with the estimated cost section (Blank F) as long as the beneficiary can 
clearly identify the services and related costs that may not be covered by Medicare. 
 
G.  Modification:  The ABN may not be modified except as specifically allowed by 
these instructions. 
 
Notifiers must exercise caution before adding any customizations beyond these 
guidelines, since changing ABNs too much could result in invalid notice and provider 
liability for noncovered charges. Validity judgments are generally made by Medicare 
contractors, usually when reviewing ABN-related claims; however, any complaints 
received may be investigated by contractors and/or CMS central or regional offices. 
 
See appendix B for an example of an approved customization of the ABN which can be 
used by providers of laboratory services. 
 
50.6.3 - Completing the ABN 
(Rev. 2782, Issued: 09-06-13, Effective: 12-09-13, Implementation: 12-09-13) 
 
Step by step instructions for notice completion are posted along with the notice on the 
CMS website and can be downloaded via this link: 
http://www.cms.gov/Medicare/Medicare-General-Information/BNI/ABN.html
  
 
Notifiers must follow guidance provided in this section and the instructions posted on the 
CMS website to construct a valid notice. 
 
50.6.4 – Retention Requirements 
(Rev. 2480, Issued: 06-01-12, Effective: 09-04-12, Implementation: 09-04-12) 
 
The ABN must be prepared with an original and at least one copy. The beneficiary is 
given his/her copy of the signed and dated ABN immediately, and the notifier should 
retain the original ABN in the beneficiary’s record. In certain situations, such as delivery 
by fax, the notifier may not have access to the original document upon signing. Retention 
of a copy of the signed document would be acceptable in specific cases such as this. 
 
In a case where the notifier that gives an ABN is not the entity that ultimately bills 
Medicare for the item or service (e.g. when a physician issues an ABN, draws a test 
specimen, and sends it to a laboratory for testing), the notifier must give a copy of the 
signed ABN to the billing entity. The copy provided must be legible and may be a 
carbon, fax, electronically scanned, or photo reproduction copy. 
 
--- page 12 ---
 
Applicable retention periods for the ABN are discussed in Chapter 1 of this manual, 
§110. In general, it is 5 years from discharge/completion of delivery of care when there 
are no other applicable requirements under State law. Retention is required in all cases, 
including those cases in which the beneficiary declined the care, refused to choose an 
option, or refused to sign the notice. Electronic retention of the signed paper document is 
acceptable. Notifiers may scan the signed paper or “wet” version of the ABN for 
electronic medical record retention and if desired, give the paper copy to the beneficiary. 
 
50.6.5 - Other Considerations During ABN Completion 
(Rev. 2782, Issued: 09-06-13, Effective: 12-09-13, Implementation: 12-09-13) 
 
A.  Beneficiary Changes His/Her Mind    
 
If after completing and signing the ABN, a beneficiary changes his/her mind, the notifier 
should present the previously completed ABN to the beneficiary and request that the 
beneficiary annotate the original ABN. The annotation must include a clear indication of 
his/her new option selection along with the beneficiary's signature and date of annotation. 
In situations where the notifier is unable to present the ABN to the beneficiary in person, 
the notifier may annotate the form to reflect the beneficiary's new choice and 
immediately forward a copy of the annotated notice to the beneficiary to sign, date, and 
return.   
 
In both situations, a copy of the annotated ABN must be provided to the beneficiary as 
soon as possible. If a related claim has been filed, it should be revised or cancelled if 
necessary to reflect the beneficiary’s new choice.  
 
B.  Beneficiary Refuses to Complete or Sign the Notice  
 
If the beneficiary refuses to choose an option and/or refuses to sign the ABN when 
required, the notifier should annotate the original copy of the ABN indicating the refusal 
to sign or choose an option and may list witness(es) to the refusal on the notice although 
this is not required. If a beneficiary refuses to sign a properly delivered ABN, the notifier 
should consider not furnishing the item/service, unless the consequences (health and 
safety of the patient, or civil liability in case of harm) are such that this is not an option. 
 
In any case, the notifier must provide a copy of the annotated ABN to the beneficiary, 
and keep the original version of the annotated notice in the patient’s file. 
 
50.7 - ABN Delivery Requirements 
(Rev. 1587, Issued: 09-05-08, Effective: 03-03-08, Implementation: 03-01-09) 
 
50.7.1 - Effective Delivery 
(Rev. 2782, Issued: 09-06-13, Effective: 12-09-13, Implementation: 12-09-13) 
 
A. Delivery Requirements 
 
--- page 13 ---
ABN delivery is considered to be effective when the notice is:  
 
1. Delivered by a suitable notifier to a capable recipient and comprehended by that 
recipient. 
 
2. Provided using the correct OMB approved notice with all required blanks 
completed. 
 
Failure to use the correct notice may lead to the notifier being found liable since the 
burden of proof is on the notifier to show that knowledge was conveyed to the 
beneficiary according to CMS instructions. 
 
3. Delivered to the beneficiary in person if possible. 
 
4. Provided far enough in advance of delivering potentially noncovered items or 
services to allow sufficient time for the beneficiary to consider all available options. 
 
5. Explained in its entirety, and all of the beneficiary’s related questions are answered 
timely, accurately, and completely to the best of the notifier’s ability. 
 
The notifier should direct the beneficiary to call 1-800-MEDICARE if the beneficiary has 
questions s/he cannot answer. If a Medicare contractor finds that the notifier refused to 
answer a beneficiary’s inquiries or direct them to 1-800-MEDICARE, the notice delivery 
will be considered defective, and the notifier will be held financially liable for 
noncovered care.  
 
6. Signed by the beneficiary or his/her representative. 
 
B.  Period of Effectiveness/ Repetitive or Continuous Noncovered Care 
 
An ABN can remain effective for up to one year.  Notifiers may give a beneficiary a 
single ABN describing an extended or repetitive course of noncovered treatment 
provided that the ABN lists all items and services that the notifier believes Medicare will 
not cover.  If applicable, the ABN must also specify the duration of the period of 
treatment.  If there is any change in care from what is described on the ABN within the 1-
year period, a new ABN must be given.  If during the course of treatment additional 
noncovered items or services are needed, the notifier must give the beneficiary another 
ABN.  There is a one year limit for using a single ABN for an extended course of 
treatment. A new ABN is required when the specified treatment extends beyond one year. 
 
If a beneficiary is receiving repetitive non-covered care, but the provider or supplier 
failed to issue an ABN before the first or the first few episodes of care were provided, the 
ABN may be issued at any time during the course of treatment.  However, if the ABN is 
issued after repetitive treatment has been initiated, the ABN cannot be retroactively dated 
or used to shift liability to the beneficiary for care that had been provided before ABN 
issuance.  In cases such as this, care that was provided before ABN delivery would be the 
financial responsibility of the supplier/provider. 
--- page 14 ---
 
C.  Incomplete ABNs 
 
Allegations of improper or incomplete notices will be investigated by Medicare 
contractors. If the notifier is found to have given improper or incomplete written notice, 
the applicable Medicare contractor will not hold the beneficiary liable in the individual 
case.  
 
D.  Electronic Issuance of the ABN 
 
Electronic issuance of ABNs is not prohibited.  If a provider elects to issue an ABN that 
is viewed on an electronic screen before signing, the beneficiary must be given the option 
of requesting paper issuance over electronic if that is what s/he prefers.  Also, regardless 
of whether a paper or electronic version is issued and regardless of whether the signature 
is digitally captured or manually penned, the beneficiary must be given a paper copy of 
the signed ABN to keep for his/her own records.  As stated earlier in §50.6.4, electronic 
retention of the signed ABN is permitted. 
 
50.7.2 - Options for Delivery Other than In-Person 
(Rev. 2782, Issued: 09-06-13, Effective: 12-09-13, Implementation: 12-09-13) 
 
ABNs should be delivered in-person and prior to the delivery of medical care which is 
presumed to be noncovered. In circumstances when in-person delivery is not possible, 
notifiers may deliver an ABN through one of the following means:  
 
• Direct telephone contact;  
• Mail;  
• Secure fax machine; or  
• Internet e-mail  
 
All methods of delivery require adherence to all statutory privacy requirements under 
HIPAA.  The notifier must receive a response from the beneficiary or his/her 
representative in order to validate delivery. 
 
When delivery is not in-person, the notifier must verify that contact was made in his/her 
records.  In order to be considered effective, the beneficiary should not dispute such 
contact.  Telephone contacts must be followed immediately by either a hand-delivered, 
mailed, emailed, or faxed notice.  The beneficiary or representative must sign and retain 
the notice and send a copy of this signed notice to the notifier for retention in the 
patient’s record. 
 
The notifier must keep a copy of the unsigned notice on file while awaiting receipt of the 
signed notice.  If the beneficiary does not return a signed copy, the notifier must 
document the initial contact and subsequent attempts to obtain a signature in appropriate 
records or on the notice itself. 
 