
--- page 1 ---
Page 3 of 28  Fileid: … ation-15-a/2026/a/xml/cycle06/source 11:47 - 15-Dec-2025
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Electronic submission of Forms W -4 and W -4P . Y ou 
may also set up a system to electronically receive Forms 
W-4 and W-4P from an employee or payee. See Pub. 15-T 
for electronic submission requirements for Forms W-4 and 
W-4P .
Electronic submission of Forms W -4R, W -4S, and 
W-4V. Y ou may also set up a system to electronically re-
ceive any or all of the following forms (and their Spanish 
versions, if available) from an employee or payee.
• Form W-4R, Withholding Certificate for Nonperiodic 
Payments and Eligible Rollover Distributions.
• Form W-4S, Request for Federal Income T ax With-
holding From Sick Pay.
• Form W-4V , Voluntary Withholding Request.
For each form that you establish an electronic submis-
sion system for, you must meet each of the following five 
requirements.
1. The electronic system must ensure that the informa-
tion received by you is the information sent by the em-
ployee or payee. The system must document all occa-
sions of user access that result in a submission. In 
addition, the design and operation of the electronic 
system, including access procedures, must make it 
reasonably certain that the person accessing the sys-
tem and submitting the form is the person identified 
on the form.
2. The electronic system must provide exactly the same 
information as the paper form.
3. The electronic submission must be signed with an 
e-signature by the employee or payee whose name is 
on the form. The e-signature must be the final entry in 
the submission.
4. Upon request, you must furnish a hard copy of any 
completed electronic form to the IRS and a statement 
that, to the best of your knowledge, the electronic 
form was submitted by the named employee or payee. 
The hard copy of the electronic form must provide ex-
actly the same information as, but need not be a fac-
simile of, the paper form.
5. Y ou must also meet all recordkeeping requirements 
that apply to the paper forms.
See Substitute Submissions of Form W -4R in section 8 
for the specific requirements for Form W-4R.
More information on electronic submissions.  For 
more information on electronic submissions for Forms 
W-4S and W -4V , see Announcement 99-6 on page 24 of 
Internal Revenue Bulletin 1999 -4 at IRS.gov/pub/irs-irbs/
irb99-04.pdf.
Additional employment tax information.  Go to 
IRS.gov/EmploymentT axes for additional employment tax 
information.
Telephone help. Y ou can call the IRS Business and Spe-
cialty T ax Line with your employment tax questions at 
800-829-4933.
Help for people with disabilities.  Y ou may call 
800-829-4059 (TDD/TTY for persons who are deaf, hard 
of hearing, or have a speech disability) with any employ-
ment tax questions. Y ou may also use this number for as-
sistance with unresolved tax problems.
Furnishing Form W -2 to employees electronically. 
Y ou may set up a system to furnish Form W -2 electroni-
cally to employees. Each employee participating must 
consent (either electronically or by paper document) to re-
ceive their Form W -2 electronically, and you must notify 
the employee of all hardware and software requirements 
to receive the form. Y ou may not send a Form W -2 elec-
tronically to any employee who doesn’t consent or who 
has revoked consent previously provided.
T o furnish Forms W-2 electronically, you must meet the 
following disclosure requirements and provide a clear and 
conspicuous statement of each requirement to your em-
ployees.
• The employee must be informed that they will receive 
a paper Form W-2 if consent isn’t given to receive it 
electronically.
• The employee must be informed of the scope and du-
ration of the consent.
• The employee must be informed of any procedure for 
obtaining a paper copy of their Form W-2 and whether 
or not the request for a paper statement is treated as a 
withdrawal of their consent to receiving their Form W-2 
electronically.
• The employee must be notified about how to withdraw 
a consent and the effective date and manner by which 
the employer will confirm the withdrawn consent. The 
employee must also be notified that the withdrawn 
consent doesn’t apply to the previously issued Forms 
W-2.
• The employee must be informed about any conditions 
under which electronic Forms W-2 will no longer be 
furnished (for example, termination of employment).
• The employee must be informed of any procedures for 
updating their contact information that enable the em-
ployer to provide electronic Forms W-2.
• The employer must notify the employee of any 
changes to the employer’s contact information.
Y ou must furnish electronic Forms W -2 by the same 
due date as the paper Forms W -2. For more information 
on furnishing Form W -2 to employees electronically, see 
Regulations section 31.6051-1(j).
Pub. 5146 explains employment tax examinations 
and appeal rights.  Pub. 5146 provides employers with 
information on how the IRS selects employment tax re-
turns to be examined, what happens during an exam, and 
what options an employer has in responding to the results 
of an exam, including how to appeal the results. Pub. 5146 
also includes information on worker classification issues 
and tip exams.
Photographs of missing children.  The IRS is a proud 
partner with the National Center for Missing & Exploited 
Children® (NCMEC). Photographs of missing children se-
lected by the Center may appear in this publication on pa-
ges that would otherwise be blank. Y ou can help bring 
Publication 15-A (2026) 3
--- page 2 ---
Page 4 of 28  Fileid: … ation-15-a/2026/a/xml/cycle06/source 11:47 - 15-Dec-2025
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
these children home by looking at the photographs and 
calling 1 -800-THE-LOST (1 -800-843-5678) if you recog-
nize a child.
Introduction
This publication supplements Pub.15. It contains special-
ized and detailed employment tax information supple-
menting the basic information provided in Pub.15. Pub. 
15-B contains information about the employment tax treat-
ment of various types of noncash compensation. Pub. 
15-T contains the Percentage Method and Wage Bracket 
Method withholding tables, including information on how 
to withhold on periodic pension or annuity payments; T a-
bles for Withholding on Distributions of Indian Gaming 
Profits to T ribal Members; and a discussion on the alterna-
tive methods for figuring federal income tax withholding.
Comments and suggestions.  We welcome your com-
ments about this publication and suggestions for future 
editions.
Y ou can send us comments through IRS.gov/
FormComments.
Or, you can write to:
Internal Revenue Service
T ax Forms and Publications
1111 Constitution Ave. NW, IR-6526
Washington, DC 20224
Although we can’t respond individually to each com-
ment received, we do appreciate your feedback and will 
consider your comments and suggestions as we revise 
our tax forms, instructions, and publications. Don’t send 
tax questions, tax returns, or payments to the above ad-
dress.
Getting answers to your tax questions.  If you have 
a tax question not answered by this publication, check 
IRS.gov and How T o Get T ax Help at the end of this publi-
cation.
Getting tax forms, instructions, and publications. 
Go to IRS.gov/Forms to download current and prior -year 
forms, instructions, and publications.
Ordering tax forms, instructions, and publications. 
Go to IRS.gov/OrderForms to order current forms, instruc-
tions, and publications; call 800 -829-3676 to order 
prior-year forms and instructions. The IRS will process 
your order for forms and publications as soon as possible. 
Don’t resubmit requests you’ve already sent us. Y ou can 
get forms and publications faster online.
Useful Items
Y ou may want to see:
Publication
15-B Employer’s T ax Guide to Fringe Benefits
15- T Federal Income T ax Withholding Methods
  15-B
  15-T
505 T ax Withholding and Estimated T ax
515 Withholding of T ax on Nonresident Aliens and 
Foreign Entities
583 Starting a Business and Keeping Records
1635 Employer Identification Number: 
Understanding Y our EIN
1. Who Are Employees?
Before you can know how to treat payments that you make 
to workers for services, you must first know the business 
relationship that exists between you and the person per-
forming the services. The person performing the services 
may be:
• An independent contractor,
• A common-law employee,
• A statutory employee, or
• A statutory nonemployee.
This discussion explains these four categories. A later 
discussion, Employee or Independent Contractor  in sec-
tion 2, points out the differences between an independent 
contractor and an employee and gives examples from var-
ious types of occupations.
If an individual who works for you isn’t an employee un-
der the common -law rules (see section 2 ), you generally 
don’t have to withhold federal income tax from that individ-
ual’s pay. However, in some cases, you may be required to 
withhold under the backup withholding requirements on 
these payments. See Pub. 15 for information on backup 
withholding.
Independent Contractors
People such as doctors, veterinarians, and auctioneers 
who work in an independent trade, business, or profession 
in which they offer their services to the public are gener-
ally not employees. However, whether such people are 
employees or independent contractors depends on the 
facts in each case. The general rule is that an individual is 
an independent contractor if you, the person for whom the 
services are performed, have the right to control or direct 
only the result of the work and not the means and meth-
ods of accomplishing the result.
Common-Law Employees
Under common-law rules, anyone who performs services 
for you is generally your employee if you have the right to 
control what will be done and how it will be done. This is 
so even when you give the employee freedom of action. 
What matters is that you have the right to control the de-
tails of how the services are performed. For a discussion 
of facts that indicate whether an individual providing serv-
ices is an independent contractor or employee, see sec-
tion 2.
  505
  515
  583
  1635
4 Publication 15-A (2026)
--- page 3 ---
Page 5 of 28  Fileid: … ation-15-a/2026/a/xml/cycle06/source 11:47 - 15-Dec-2025
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
If you have an employer -employee relationship, it 
makes no difference how it is labeled. The substance of 
the relationship, not the label, governs the worker’s status. 
It doesn’t matter whether the individual is employed full 
time or part time.
For employment tax purposes, no distinction is made 
between classes of employees. Superintendents, manag-
ers, and other supervisory personnel are all employees. 
An officer of a corporation is generally an employee; how-
ever, an officer who performs no services or only minor 
services, and neither receives nor is entitled to receive 
any pay, isn’t considered an employee. A director of a cor-
poration isn’t an employee with respect to services per-
formed as a director.
Y ou generally have to withhold and pay income, social 
security, and Medicare taxes on wages that you pay to 
common-law employees. However, the wages of certain 
employees may be exempt from one or more of these 
taxes. See Employees of Exempt Organizations  (section 
3) and Religious Exemptions and Special Rules for Minis-
ters (section 4).
Additional information. For more information about the 
treatment of special types of employment, the treatment of 
special types of payments, and similar subjects, see Pub. 
15.
Statutory Employees
If workers are independent contractors under the
common-law rules, such workers may nevertheless be 
treated as employees by statute (also known as statutory 
employees) for certain employment tax purposes. This 
would happen if they fall within any one of the following 
four categories and meet the three conditions described 
next under Social security and Medicare taxes.
1. A driver who distributes beverages (other than milk) or 
meat, vegetables, fruit, or bakery products; or who 
picks up and delivers laundry or dry cleaning, if the 
driver is your agent or is paid on commission.
2. A full-time life insurance sales agent whose principal 
business activity is selling life insurance or annuity 
contracts, or both, primarily for one life insurance 
company.
3. An individual who works at home on materials or 
goods that you supply and that must be returned to 
you or to a person you name, if you also furnish speci-
fications for the work to be done.
4. A full-time traveling or city salesperson who works on 
your behalf and turns in orders to you from wholesal-
ers; retailers; contractors; or operators of hotels, res-
taurants, or other similar establishments. The goods 
sold must be merchandise for resale or supplies for 
use in the buyer’s business operation. The work per-
formed for you must be the salesperson’s principal 
business activity. See Salesperson in section 2.
Social security and Medicare taxes. Y ou must withhold 
social security and Medicare taxes from the wages of stat-
utory employees if all three of the following conditions ap-
ply.
• The service contract states or implies that substan-
tially all the services are to be performed personally by 
them.
• They don’t have a substantial investment in the equip-
ment and property used to perform the services (other 
than an investment in facilities for transportation, such 
as a car or truck).
• The services are performed on a continuing basis for 
the same payer.
Federal unemployment (FUTA) tax.  For FUTA tax (the 
unemployment tax paid under the Federal Unemployment 
T ax Act), the term “employee” means the same as it does 
for social security and Medicare taxes, except that it 
doesn’t include statutory employees defined in categories 
2 and 3 above. Any individual who is a statutory employee 
described under category 1 or 4 above is also an em-
ployee for FUTA tax purposes and subject to FUTA tax.
Income tax.  Don’t withhold federal income tax from the 
wages of statutory employees.
Reporting payments to statutory employees.  Furnish 
Form W-2 to a statutory employee, and check “Statutory 
employee” in box 13. Show your payments to the em-
ployee as “other compensation” in box 1. Also, show so-
cial security wages in box 3, social security tax withheld in 
box 4, Medicare wages in box 5, and Medicare tax with-
held in box 6. The statutory employee can deduct their 
trade or business expenses from the payments shown on 
Form W -2. The statutory employee reports earnings on 
line 1 of Schedule C (Form 1040), Profit or Loss From 
Business, and also deducts business expenses on 
Schedule C (Form 1040).
H-2A agricultural workers.  On Form W -2, don’t check 
box 13 (Statutory employee), as H -2A workers aren’t stat-
utory employees.
Statutory Nonemployees
There are three categories of statutory nonemployees: di-
rect sellers, licensed real estate agents, and certain com-
panion sitters. Direct sellers and licensed real estate 
agents are treated as self-employed for all federal tax pur-
poses, including income and employment taxes, if:
• Substantially all payments for their services as direct 
sellers or real estate agents are directly related to 
sales or other output, rather than to the number of 
hours worked; and
• Their services are performed under a written contract 
providing that they won’t be treated as employees for 
federal tax purposes.
Direct sellers.  Direct sellers include persons falling 
within any of the following three groups.
Publication 15-A (2026) 5
--- page 4 ---
Page 6 of 28  Fileid: … ation-15-a/2026/a/xml/cycle06/source 11:47 - 15-Dec-2025
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
1. Persons engaged in selling (or soliciting the sale of) 
consumer products in the home or place of business 
other than in a permanent retail establishment.
2. Persons engaged in selling (or soliciting the sale of) 
consumer products to any buyer on a buy-sell basis, a 
deposit-commission basis, or any similar basis pre-
scribed by regulations, for resale in the home or at a 
place of business other than in a permanent retail es-
tablishment.
3. Persons engaged in the trade or business of deliver-
ing or distributing newspapers or shopping news (in-
cluding any services directly related to such delivery 
or distribution).
Direct selling includes activities of individuals who at-
tempt to increase direct sales activities of their direct sell-
ers and who earn income based on the productivity of 
their direct sellers. Such activities include providing moti-
vation and encouragement; imparting skills, knowledge, or 
experience; and recruiting.
Licensed real estate agents. This category includes in-
dividuals engaged in appraisal activities for real estate 
sales if they earn income based on sales or other output.
Companion sitters.  Companion sitters are individuals 
who furnish personal attendance, companionship, or 
household care services to children or to individuals who 
are elderly or disabled. A person engaged in the trade or 
business of putting the sitters in touch with individuals who 
wish to employ them (that is, a companion sitting place-
ment service) won’t be treated as the employer of the sit-
ters if that person doesn’t receive or pay the salary or wa-
ges of the sitters and is compensated by the sitters or the 
persons who employ them on a fee basis. Companion sit-
ters who aren’t employees of a companion sitting place-
ment service are generally treated as self -employed for all 
federal tax purposes. However, the companion sitter may 
be an employee of the individual for whom the sitting serv-
ices are performed; see Pub. 926, Household Employer’s 
T ax Guide.
Misclassification of Employees
Consequences of treating an employee as an inde-
pendent contractor. If you classify an employee as an 
independent contractor and you have no reasonable basis 
for doing so, you’re liable for employment taxes for that 
worker, and the relief provision, discussed next, won’t ap-
ply. See section 2 of Pub. 15 for more information.
Relief provision. If you have a reasonable basis for not 
treating a worker as an employee, you may be relieved 
from having to pay employment taxes for that worker. T o 
get this relief, you must file all required federal information 
returns on a basis consistent with your treatment of the 
worker. Y ou (or your predecessor) must not have treated 
any worker holding a substantially similar position as an 
employee for any periods beginning after 1977.
Technical service specialists.  This relief provision 
doesn’t apply to a technical service specialist you provide 
to another business under an arrangement between you 
and the other business. A technical service specialist is an 
engineer, designer, drafter, computer programmer, sys-
tems analyst, or other similarly skilled worker engaged in a 
similar line of work.
This limit on the application of the rule doesn’t affect the 
determination of whether such workers are employees un-
der the common-law rules. The common -law rules control 
whether the specialist is treated as an employee or an in-
dependent contractor. However, if you directly contract 
with a technical service specialist to provide services for 
your business and not for another business, you may still 
be entitled to the relief provision.
Test proctors and room supervisors.  The consis-
tent treatment requirement doesn’t apply to services per-
formed after 2006 by an individual as a test proctor or 
room supervisor assisting in the administration of college 
entrance or placement examinations if the individual:
• Is performing the services for a section 501(c) organi-
zation exempt from tax under section 501(a) of the 
Code, and
• Isn’t otherwise treated as an employee of the organi-
zation for employment taxes.
Voluntary Classification Settlement Program (VCSP). 
Employers who are currently treating their workers (or a 
class or group of workers) as independent contractors or 
other nonemployees and want to voluntarily reclassify 
their workers as employees for future tax periods may be 
eligible to participate in the VCSP if certain requirements 
are met. File Form 8952 to apply for the VCSP . For more 
information, go to IRS.gov/VCSP.
2. Employee or Independent 
Contractor?
An employer must generally withhold federal income 
taxes, withhold and pay over social security and Medicare 
taxes, and pay unemployment tax on wages paid to an 
employee. An employer doesn’t generally have to withhold 
or pay over any federal taxes on payments to independent 
contractors.
Common-Law Rules
T o determine whether an individual is an employee or an 
independent contractor under the common -law rules, the 
relationship of the worker and the business must be exam-
ined. In any employee -independent contractor determina-
tion, all information that provides evidence of the degree 
of control and the degree of independence must be con-
sidered.
Facts that provide evidence of the degree of control 
and independence fall into three categories: behavioral 
control, financial control, and the type of relationship of the 
parties. These facts are discussed next.
6 Publication 15-A (2026)
--- page 5 ---
Page 7 of 28  Fileid: … ation-15-a/2026/a/xml/cycle06/source 11:47 - 15-Dec-2025
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Behavioral control.  Facts that show whether the busi-
ness has a right to direct and control how the worker does 
the task for which the worker is hired include the type and 
degree of the following.
Instructions that the business gives to the worker. 
An employee is generally subject to the business’ instruc-
tions about when, where, and how to work. All of the fol-
lowing are examples of types of instructions about how to 
do work.
• When and where to do the work.
• What tools or equipment to use.
• What workers to hire or to assist with the work.
• Where to purchase supplies and services.
• What work must be performed by a specified
individual.
• What order or sequence to follow.
The amount of instruction needed varies among differ-
ent jobs. Even if no instructions are given, sufficient be-
havioral control may exist if the employer has the right to 
control how the work results are achieved. A business 
may lack the knowledge to instruct some highly special-
ized professionals; in other cases, the task may require lit-
tle or no instruction. The key consideration is whether the 
business has retained the right to control the details of a 
worker’s performance or has instead given up that right.
Training that the business gives to the worker.  An 
employee may be trained to perform services in a particu-
lar manner. Independent contractors ordinarily use their 
own methods.
Financial control. Facts that show whether the business 
has a right to control the business aspects of the worker’s 
job include the following.
The extent to which the worker has unreimbursed 
business expenses. Independent contractors are more 
likely to have unreimbursed expenses than are employ-
ees. Fixed ongoing costs that are incurred regardless of 
whether work is currently being performed are especially 
important. However, employees may also incur unreim-
bursed expenses in connection with the services that they 
perform for their employer.
The extent of the worker’s investment.  An inde-
pendent contractor often has a significant investment in 
the facilities or tools they use in performing services for 
someone else. However, a significant investment isn’t nec-
essary for independent contractor status.
The extent to which the worker makes their serv-
ices available to the relevant market.  An independent 
contractor is generally free to seek out business opportu-
nities. Independent contractors often advertise, maintain a 
visible business location, and are available to work in the 
relevant market.
How the business pays the worker.  An employee is 
generally guaranteed a regular wage amount for an hourly, 
weekly, or other period of time. This usually indicates that 
a worker is an employee, even when the wage or salary is 
supplemented by a commission. An independent contrac-
tor is often paid a flat fee or on a time and materials basis 
for the job. However, it is common in some professions, 
such as law, to pay independent contractors hourly.
The extent to which the worker can realize a profit 
or loss. An independent contractor can make a profit or 
loss.
Type of relationship. Facts that show the parties’ type of 
relationship include the following.
• Written contracts describing the relationship the par-
ties intended to create.
• Whether or not the business provides the worker with 
employee-type benefits, such as insurance, a pension 
plan, vacation pay, or sick pay.
• The permanency of the relationship. If you engage 
a worker with the expectation that the relationship will 
continue indefinitely, rather than for a specific project 
or period, this is generally considered evidence that 
your intent was to create an employer-employee rela-
tionship.
• The extent to which services performed by the 
worker are a key aspect of the regular business 
of the company. If a worker provides services that 
are a key aspect of your regular business activity, it is 
more likely that you’ll have the right to direct and con-
trol their activities. For example, if a law firm hires an 
attorney, it is likely that it will present the attorney’s 
work as its own and would have the right to control or 
direct that work. This would indicate an employer-em-
ployee relationship.
IRS help. If you want the IRS to determine whether or not 
a worker is an employee, file Form SS-8 with the IRS.
Industry Examples
The following examples may help you properly classify 
your workers.
Building and Construction Industry
Example 1. Jerry Jones has an agreement with Wilma 
White to supervise the remodeling of a house. Wilma 
didn’t advance funds to help Jerry carry on the work. 
Wilma makes direct payments to the suppliers for all nec-
essary materials. Wilma carries liability and workers’ com-
pensation insurance covering Jerry and others that Jerry 
engaged to assist on the remodel. Wilma pays them an 
hourly rate and exercises almost constant supervision 
over the work. Jerry isn’t free to transfer the assistants to 
other jobs. Jerry may not work on other jobs while working 
for Wilma. Jerry assumes no responsibility to complete 
the work and will incur no contractual liability if the work 
isn’t completed. Jerry and the assistants perform personal 
services for hourly wages. Jerry Jones and the assistants 
are employees of Wilma White.
Publication 15-A (2026) 7
--- page 6 ---
Page 8 of 28  Fileid: … ation-15-a/2026/a/xml/cycle06/source 11:47 - 15-Dec-2025
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
Example 2. Milton Manning, an experienced tile setter, 
orally agreed with a corporation to perform full -time serv-
ices at construction sites. Milton uses personally owned 
tools and performs services in the order designated by the 
corporation and according to its specifications. The corpo-
ration supplies all materials, makes frequent inspections 
of Milton’s work, pays Milton on a piecework basis, and 
carries workers’ compensation insurance on Milton. Milton 
doesn’t have a place of business or seek to perform simi-
lar services for others. Either party can end the services at 
any time. Milton Manning is an employee of the corpora-
tion.
Example 3. Wallace Black agreed with Sawdust Co. to 
supply the construction labor for a group of houses. The 
company agreed to pay all construction costs. However, 
Wallace supplies all the tools and equipment. Wallace 
performs personal services as a carpenter and mechanic 
for an hourly wage. Wallace also acts as superintendent 
and foreman and engages other individuals to assist with 
construction. The company has the right to select, ap-
prove, or discharge any helper. A company representative 
makes frequent inspections of the construction site. When 
a house is finished, Wallace is paid a certain percentage 
of its costs. Wallace isn’t responsible for faults, defects of 
construction, or wasteful operation. At the end of each 
week, Wallace presents the company with a statement of 
the amount that was spent, including the payroll. The com-
pany gives Wallace a check for that amount from which 
Wallace pays the assistants, although Wallace isn’t per-
sonally liable for their wages. Wallace Black and the assis-
tants are employees of Sawdust Co.
Example 4. Bill Plum contracted with Elm Corporation 
to complete the roofing on a housing complex. A signed 
contract established a flat amount for the services ren-
dered by Bill Plum. Bill is a licensed roofer and carries 
workers’ compensation and liability insurance under the 
business name, Plum Roofing. Bill hires roofers for Plum 
Roofing who are treated as employees for federal employ-
ment tax purposes. If there is a problem with the roofing 
work, Plum Roofing is responsible for paying for any re-
pairs. Bill Plum, doing business as Plum Roofing, is an in-
dependent contractor.
Example 5. Vera Elm, an electrician, submitted a job 
estimate to a housing complex for electrical work at $16 
per hour for 400 hours. Vera is to receive $1,280 every 2 
weeks for the next 10 weeks. This isn’t considered pay-
ment by the hour. Even if Vera works more or less than 
400 hours to complete the work, Vera will receive $6,400. 
Vera also performs additional electrical installations under 
contracts with other companies that are obtained through 
advertisements. Vera is an independent contractor.
Trucking Industry
Example. Rose T rucking contracts to deliver material 
for Forest, Inc., at $140 per ton. Rose T rucking isn’t paid 
for any articles that aren’t delivered. At times, Jan Rose, 
who operates as Rose T rucking, may also lease another 
truck and engage a driver to complete the contract. All 
operating expenses, including insurance coverage, are 
paid by Jan Rose. All equipment is owned or rented by 
Jan and Jan is responsible for all maintenance. None of 
the drivers are provided by Forest, Inc. Jan Rose, operat-
ing as Rose T rucking, is an independent contractor.
Computer Industry
Example. Steve Smith, a computer programmer, is 
laid off when Megabyte, Inc., downsizes. Megabyte 
agrees to pay Steve a flat amount to complete a one -time 
project to create a certain product. It isn’t clear how long it 
will take to complete the project, and Steve isn’t guaran-
teed any minimum payment for the hours spent on the 
program. Megabyte provides Steve with no instructions 
beyond the specifications for the product itself. Steve and 
Megabyte have a written contract, which provides that 
Steve is considered to be an independent contractor, is re-
quired to pay federal and state taxes, and receives no 
benefits from Megabyte. Megabyte will file Form 
1099-NEC to report the amount paid to Steve. Steve 
works at home and isn’t expected or allowed to attend 
meetings of the software development group. Steve is an 
independent contractor.
Automobile Industry
Example 1. Donna Lee is a salesperson employed on 
a full-time basis by Bob Blue, an auto dealer. Donna works 
6 days a week and is on duty in Bob’s showroom on cer-
tain assigned days and times. Donna appraises trade -ins, 
but the appraisals are subject to the sales manager’s ap-
proval. Lists of prospective customers belong to the 
dealer. Donna is required to develop leads and report re-
sults to the sales manager. Due to experience, Donna re-
quires only minimal assistance in closing and financing 
sales and in other phases of work. Donna is paid a com-
mission and is eligible for prizes and bonuses offered by 
Bob. Bob also pays the cost of health insurance and 
group-term life insurance for Donna. Donna is an em-
ployee of Bob Blue.
Example 2. Sam Sparks performs auto repair services 
in the repair department of an auto sales company. Sam 
works regular hours and is paid on a percentage basis. 
Sam has no investment in the repair department. The 
sales company supplies all facilities, repair parts, and sup-
plies; issues instructions on the amounts to be charged, 
parts to be used, and the time for completion of each job; 
and checks all estimates and repair orders. Sam is an em-
ployee of the sales company.
Example 3. An auto sales agency furnishes space for 
Helen Bach to perform auto repair services. Helen pro-
vides personally owned tools, equipment, and supplies. 
Helen seeks out business from insurance adjusters and 
other individuals and does all of the body and paint work 
that comes to the agency. Helen hires and discharges 
helpers; determines working hours; quotes prices for re-
pair work; makes all necessary adjustments; assumes all 
losses from uncollectible accounts; and receives, as com-
pensation for services, a large percentage of the gross 
8 Publication 15-A (2026)
--- page 7 ---
Page 9 of 28  Fileid: … ation-15-a/2026/a/xml/cycle06/source 11:47 - 15-Dec-2025
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
collections from the auto repair shop. Helen is an inde-
pendent contractor and the helpers are Helen’s employ-
ees.
Attorney
Example. Donna Yuma is a sole practitioner who rents 
office space and pays for the following items: telephone, 
computer, online legal research linkup, fax machine, and 
photocopier. Donna buys office supplies and pays bar 
dues and membership dues for three other professional 
organizations. Donna has a part -time receptionist who 
also does the bookkeeping. Donna pays the receptionist, 
withholds and pays federal and state employment taxes, 
and files a Form W -2 each year. For the past 2 years, 
Donna has had only three clients, corporations with which 
there have been long -standing relationships. Donna 
charges the corporations an hourly rate for services, send-
ing monthly bills detailing the work performed for the prior 
month. The bills include charges for long -distance calls, 
online research time, fax charges, photocopies, postage, 
and travel, costs for which the corporations have agreed to 
reimburse Donna. Donna is an independent contractor.
Taxicab Driver
Example. T om Spruce rents a cab from T aft Cab Co. 
for $150 per day. T om pays the costs of maintaining and 
operating the cab. T om keeps all fares received from cus-
tomers. Although T om receives the benefit of T aft’s 
two-way radio communication equipment, dispatcher, and 
advertising, these items benefit both T aft and T om Spruce. 
T om is an independent contractor.
Salesperson
T o determine whether salespersons are employees under 
the usual common-law rules, you must evaluate each indi-
vidual case. If a salesperson who works for you doesn’t 
meet the tests for a common -law employee, discussed 
earlier in this section, you don’t have to withhold federal in-
come tax from their pay (see Statutory Employees in sec-
tion 1). However, even if a salesperson isn’t an employee 
under the usual common -law rules for income tax with-
holding, their pay may still be subject to social security, 
Medicare, and FUTA taxes as a statutory employee.
T o determine whether a salesperson is an employee for 
social security, Medicare, and FUTA tax purposes, the 
salesperson must meet all eight elements of the statutory 
employee test. A salesperson is a statutory employee for 
social security, Medicare, and FUTA tax purposes if they:
1. Work full time for one person or company except, pos-
sibly, for sideline sales activities on behalf of some 
other person;
2. Sell on behalf of, and turn their orders over to, the per-
son or company for which they work;
3. Sell to wholesalers, retailers, contractors, or operators 
of hotels, restaurants, or similar establishments;
4. Sell merchandise for resale, or supplies for use in the 
customer’s business;
5. Agree to do substantially all of this work personally;
6. Have no substantial investment in the facilities used to 
do the work, other than in facilities for transportation;
7. Maintain a continuing relationship with the person or 
company for which they work; and
8. Aren’t an employee under common-law rules.
3. Employees of Exempt 
Organizations
Many nonprofit organizations are exempt from federal in-
come tax. Although they don’t have to pay federal income 
tax themselves, they must still withhold federal income tax 
from the pay of their employees. However, there are spe-
cial social security, Medicare, and FUTA tax rules that ap-
ply to the wages that they pay their employees.
Section 501(c)(3) organizations.  Nonprofit organiza-
tions that are exempt from federal income tax under sec-
tion 501(c)(3) of the Internal Revenue Code include any 
community chest, fund, or foundation organized and oper-
ated exclusively for religious, charitable, scientific, testing 
for public safety, or literary or educational purposes; fos-
tering national or international amateur sports competi-
tion; or the prevention of cruelty to children or animals. 
These organizations are usually corporations and are ex-
empt from federal income tax under section 501(a).
Social security and Medicare taxes.  Wages paid to 
employees of section 501(c)(3) organizations are subject 
to social security and Medicare taxes unless one of the 
following situations applies.
• The organization pays an employee less than $100 in 
a calendar year.
• The organization is a church or church-controlled or-
ganization opposed for religious reasons to the pay-
ment of social security and Medicare taxes and has 
filed Form 8274 to elect exemption from social security 
and Medicare taxes. The organization must have filed 
for exemption before the first date on which a quarterly 
employment tax return (Form 941) or annual employ-
ment tax return (Form 944) would otherwise be due.
An employee of a church or church-controlled organiza-
tion that is exempt from social security and Medicare 
taxes must pay self -employment tax if the employee is 
paid $108.28 or more in a year. However, an employee 
who is a member of a qualified religious sect can apply for 
an exemption from the self -employment tax by filing Form 
4029. See Members of recognized religious sects op-
posed to insurance in section 4.
FUTA tax. An organization that is exempt from federal 
income tax under section 501(c)(3) of the Internal Reve-
nue Code is also exempt from FUTA tax. This exemption 
can’t be waived. However, a section 501(c)(3) 
Publication 15-A (2026) 9
--- page 8 ---
Page 10 of 28  Fileid: … ation-15-a/2026/a/xml/cycle06/source 11:47 - 15-Dec-2025
The type and rule above prints on all proofs including departmental reproduction proofs. MUST be removed before printing.
organization is subject to FUTA tax when paying wages to 
employees on behalf of a non -section 501(c)(3) organiza-
tion (for example, a section 501(c)(3) organization paying 
wages to employees of a related non-section 501(c)(3) or-
ganization, a section 501(c)(3) organization that is a sec-
tion 3504 agent paying wages on behalf of a non -section 
501(c)(3) organization, a section 501(c)(3) organization 
that is a common paymaster paying wages on behalf of a 
non-section 501(c)(3) organization, etc.).
Tip:  An organization wholly owned by a state or its po-
litical subdivision should contact the appropriate state offi-
cial for information about reporting and getting social se-
curity and Medicare coverage for its employees.
Other than section 501(c)(3) organizations.  Nonprofit 
organizations that aren’t section 501(c)(3) organizations 
may also be exempt from federal income tax under section 
501(a) or section 521. However, these organizations aren’t 
exempt from withholding federal income, social security, or 
Medicare tax from their employees’ pay, or from paying 
FUTA tax. T wo special rules for social security, Medicare, 
and FUTA taxes apply.
1. If an employee is paid less than $100 during a calen-
dar year, their wages aren’t subject to social security 
and Medicare taxes.
2. If an employee is paid less than $50 in a calendar 
quarter, their wages aren’t subject to FUTA tax for the 
quarter.
The above rules don’t apply to employees who work for 
pension plans and other similar organizations described in 
section 401(a).
Excise tax on excess executive compensation.  Cer-
tain tax-exempt organizations may be subject to an excise 
tax on excess executive compensation. For more informa-
tion, see the Instructions for Form 4720, Return of Certain 
Excise T axes Under Chapters 41 and 42 of the Internal 
Revenue Code.
4. Religious Exemptions and 
Special Rules for Ministers
Special rules apply to the treatment of ministers for social 
security and Medicare tax purposes. An exemption from 
social security and Medicare taxes is available for minis-
ters and certain other religious workers and members of 
certain recognized religious sects. For more information 
on getting an exemption, see Pub. 517.
Ministers. Ministers are individuals who are duly or-
dained, commissioned, or licensed by a religious body 
constituting a church or church denomination. They are 
given the authority to conduct religious worship, perform 
sacerdotal functions, and administer ordinances and sac-
raments according to the prescribed tenets and practices 
of that religious organization.
Ministers are employees if they perform services in the 
exercise of ministry and are subject to your will and con-
trol. The common -law rules discussed in section 1  and 
section 2 should be applied to determine whether a minis-
ter is your employee or is self-employed. Whether the min-
ister is an employee or self -employed, the earnings of a 
minister aren’t subject to federal income, social security, 
and Medicare tax withholding. However, even if the minis-
ter is a common -law employee, the earnings as reported 
on the minister’s Form 1040 or 1040 -SR are subject to 
self-employment tax and federal income tax. Y ou don’t 
withhold these taxes from wages earned by a minister, but 
if the minister is your employee, you may agree with the 
minister to voluntarily withhold tax to cover the minister’s 
liability for self -employment tax and federal income tax. 
For more information, see Pub. 517.
Form W-2. If your minister is an employee, report all 
taxable compensation as wages in box 1 of Form W -2. In-
clude in this amount expense allowances or reimburse-
ments paid under a nonaccountable plan, discussed in 
section 5 of Pub. 15. Don’t include a parsonage allowance 
(excludable housing allowance) in this amount. Y ou may 
report a designated parsonage or rental allowance (hous-
ing allowance) and a utilities allowance, or the rental value 
of housing provided in a separate statement or in box 14 
of Form W-2. Don’t show on Form W-2, Form 941, or Form 
944 any amount as social security or Medicare wages, or 
any withholding for social security or Medicare tax. If you 
withheld federal income tax from the minister under a vol-
untary agreement, this amount should be shown in box 2 
of Form W-2 as federal income tax withheld. For more in-
formation on ministers, see Pub. 517.
Exemptions for ministers and others.  Certain or-
dained ministers, Christian Science practitioners, and 
members of religious orders who haven’t taken a vow of 
poverty may apply to exempt their earnings from self -em-
ployment tax on religious grounds. The application must 
be based on conscientious opposition because of per-
sonal considerations to public insurance that makes pay-
ments in the event of death, disability, old age, or retire-
ment, or that makes payments toward the cost of, or 
provides services for, medical care, including social secur-
ity and Medicare benefits. The exemption applies only to 
qualified services performed for the religious organization. 
See Revenue Procedure 91 -20, 1991 -1 C.B. 524, for 
guidelines to determine whether an organization is a reli-
gious order or whether an individual is a member of a reli-
gious order.
T o apply for the exemption, the employee should file 
Form 4361. See Pub. 517 for more information about 
claiming an exemption from self -employment tax using 
Form 4361.
Members of recognized religious sects opposed to 
insurance. If you belong to a recognized religious sect or 
to a division of such sect that is opposed to insurance, you 
may qualify for an exemption from the self -employment 
tax. T o qualify, you must be conscientiously opposed to 
accepting the benefits of any public or private insurance 
that makes payments because of death, disability, old 
10 Publication 15-A (2026)