
--- page 1 ---
1 
 
  
I.R.C. Section 3509—Determination of Employer's Liability for Certain Employment 
Taxes 
    (Also: I.R.C. Section 7436 and Section 530 of the Revenue Act of 1978) 
 
 
 
Rev. Rul.  2025-3  
 
  
ISSUES  
1.  Whether section 530 of the Revenue Act of 1978, Pub. L. No. 95-600, as 
amended (section 530), or the reduced rates of § 3509 of the Internal Revenue Code 
(the Code) apply in the five situations set out below.  
2.  Whether the Internal Revenue Service (IRS) will issue a Notice of 
Employment Tax Determination Under IRC § 7436 (§ 7436 Notice) in the five situations, 
set out below. 
FACT SITUATIONS 
Situation 1.  Taxpayer (TP) hires individuals who provide services to TP during 
the year.  For those services, TP pays each individual a weekly fixed amount and a 
weekly bonus amount.  TP does not withhold or pay federal employment taxes with 
regard to any of the payments and reports the total amount of the fixed weekly amounts 
and the weekly bonus amounts on Form 1099-NEC “Nonemployee Compensation.”  
During an audit of TP by the IRS for the year, the IRS determines (1) that TP does not 
meet the statutory requirements for section 530 relief, and (2) that the individuals are 
employees of TP.  The IRS proposes to assess federal employment taxes on the 
--- page 2 ---
2 
 
weekly fixed amounts and the weekly bonus amounts, which should have been reported 
as wages on Form 941 “Employer’s QUARTERLY Federal Tax Return,” and Forms W-2 
“Wage and Tax Statement.”  TP claims it satisfies the statutory requirements for section 
530 relief and does not agree that the individuals are its employees. 
Situation 2.  TP employs individuals who perform services during the year.  TP 
treats the individuals as employees for the services that they perform.  For those 
services, TP pays each individual a weekly salary and a weekly bonus amount.  TP 
treats the weekly salary as wages for federal employment tax purposes.  TP withholds 
and pays federal employment taxes with respect to the weekly salary and reports the 
salary and federal employment taxes on Form 941 and Forms W-2.  TP does not treat 
the weekly bonus amounts as wages for federal employment tax purposes. It does not 
withhold or pay any federal employment taxes with regard to the bonus amounts and 
reports the bonus amounts on Forms 1099-NEC.  During an audit of TP by the IRS for 
the year, the IRS concludes that the bonus amounts are wages.  The IRS proposes to 
assess federal employment taxes on the bonus amounts, which should have been 
reported as wages on Form 941 and Forms W-2.  TP claims it satisfies the statutory 
requirements for section 530 relief with respect to the bonus amounts and does not 
agree that the bonus amounts are wages. 
Situation 3.  Same facts as situation 2 except TP does not report the weekly 
bonus amounts on Forms 1099-NEC or any other information return. 
--- page 3 ---
3 
 
Situation 4.  Same facts as situation 2 except TP does not report the weekly 
bonus amounts on Forms 1099-NEC or any other information return and does not claim 
it satisfies the statutory requirements for section 530 relief with respect to the bonus 
amounts. 
Situation 5.  TP employs individuals who perform services during the year.  TP 
enters into a contract with a third party (3P) to pay each individual a weekly salary, 
withhold and pay federal employment taxes, and file federal employment tax returns.1  
3P pays the weekly salaries, withholds, pays federal employment taxes, and reports the 
weekly salaries and taxes on Form 941 and Forms W-2 using its own employer 
identification number (EIN).  In December of that same year, TP pays a year-end bonus 
amount directly to each individual for the individual’s services during the year but does 
not treat the year-end bonus amounts as wages.  TP does not withhold or pay any 
federal employment taxes or report the bonus amounts on any information return.  
During an audit of TP by the IRS for the year, the IRS concludes that the bonus 
amounts are wages.  The IRS proposes to assess federal employment taxes on the 
bonus amounts, which should have been reported as wages on Form 941 and Forms 
 
1 A taxpayer may choose to enter into an agreement with a third party in which the third party agrees to 
perform some or all of the employer’s federal employment payment, withholding, and reporting 
responsibilities.  For purposes of simplicity, this revenue ruling does not address the different variations of 
third-party payor arrangements, and assumes 3P correctly used its own EIN.  However, depending on the 
facts and circumstances and the type of arrangement, an employer who uses a third party to perform 
federal employment tax functions on its behalf may remain solely liable for federal employment taxes, 
may become jointly and severally liable for such taxes, or may be relieved of liability for such taxes.  This 
revenue ruling does not address which party will be ultimately liable for any unpaid employment taxes, as 
these discussions are beyond the scope of this revenue ruling. 
--- page 4 ---
4 
W-2.  TP claims it satisfies the statutory requirements for section 530 relief with respect 
to the bonus amounts and does not agree the bonus amounts are wages. 
LAW AND ANALYSIS 
An employer is liable for federal employment taxes on wages paid to employees.  
Federal employment taxes include Federal Insurance Contributions Act (FICA) taxes, 
Railroad Retirement Tax Act (RRTA) taxes,2 Federal Unemployment Tax Act (FUTA) 
taxes, and the collection of income tax at source on wages (income tax withholding). 
In general, § 3102 of the Code requires an employer to withhold and pay to the 
IRS the employee share of FICA taxes from wages when paid to the employee.  
Furthermore, § 3111 generally also requires the employer to pay to the IRS the 
employer share of FICA taxes at the same time. Section 3121(a) defines “wages” for 
FICA tax purposes as all remuneration for employment, including the cash value of all 
remuneration (including benefits) paid in any medium other than cash, unless 
specifically excepted.  Section 3121(b) generally defines "employment" as any service, 
of whatever nature, performed by an employee for the person employing him unless a 
specific exception applies.  Similarly, § 3301 imposes on every employer an obligation 
to pay FUTA taxes on wages as defined in § 3301b).  Section 3306(b) and (c) contain 
similar definitions to FICA for “wages” and “employment,” respectively, for FUTA tax 
2   For purposes of simplicity, this revenue procedure does not discuss the application of these rules to 
RRTA.  However, rules similar to those discussed with respect to Section 530 apply for purposes of 
determining whether a taxpayer will not be liable for RRTA taxes, with respect to an individual or class of 
workers (though the reduced rates of § 3509 discussed in this revenue procedure do not apply for 
purposes of RRTA). 
--- page 5 ---
5 
 
purposes.  Section 3402(a) imposes the obligation on an employer to withhold income 
taxes from wages as defined in § 3401(a).  Section 3401(a) provides that the term 
“wages” means all remuneration for services performed by an employee for his 
employer including the cash value of all remuneration (including benefits) paid in any 
medium other than cash, unless a specific exception applies. 
The definitions of “wages” and “employment” for FICA, FUTA, and income tax 
withholding purposes are premised on an individual being an employee and are not 
applied when an individual is properly classified as an independent contractor or has 
some other non-employee status.  If an individual is properly classified as an 
independent contractor, the individual’s earnings are subject to self-employment tax, 
which consists of social security and Medicare taxes, if the other requirements for 
reporting self-employment taxes are met.  There is no FUTA tax for self-employed 
individuals.   
For employment tax purposes, an employee generally is any individual who, 
under the usual common law rules applicable in determining the employer-employee 
relationship, has the status of an employee.  See §§ 31.3121(d)-1(c), 31.3306(i)-1, and 
31.3401(c)-1 of the Employment Tax Regulations.  Generally, an employer-employee 
relationship exists when the person for whom services are performed has the right to 
direct and control the individual who performs the services, not only as to the result to 
be accomplished by the work but also as to the details and means by which that result 
is accomplished.  That is, an employee is subject to the direction and control of the 
--- page 6 ---
6 
 
employer not only as to what shall be done but how it shall be done.  Individuals who 
are not employees under the common law rules may still be employees by statute under 
certain FICA, FUTA, and income tax withholding provisions.  See, e.g., § 3121(d) and 
the accompanying regulations. 
Section 530 provides that a taxpayer will not be liable for federal employment 
taxes, with respect to an individual or class of workers, if certain statutory requirements 
are met.3  Under section 530, the taxpayer, not the individual worker4, is entitled to relief 
from the employment tax liability that would otherwise apply under subtitle C of the 
Code, and any related interest or penalties attributable to that employment tax liability.  
The taxes imposed by subtitle C include FICA taxes, RRTA taxes, FUTA taxes, and 
income tax withholding. 
Section 530 relief applies only if the taxpayer did not treat the individual as an 
employee for federal employment tax purposes for the period at issue and meets each 
of the following requirements for such period: (1) the taxpayer filed
5 all required federal 
tax returns, including information returns, consistent with the taxpayer’s treatment of the 
 
3 Section 530 (entitled “Controversies Involving Whether Individuals are Employees for Purposes of 
Employment Taxes”) was originally enacted as a temporary measure to provide relief for taxpayers who 
were involved in employment status (worker classification) disputes with the IRS, and who faced large 
employment tax assessments as a result of the IRS’s proposed reclassifications of workers.  Section 530 
was extended indefinitely by the Tax Equity and Fiscal Responsibility Act of 1982.   Section 530 is not 
part of the Internal Revenue Code (Code). 
4 Section 530 relief does not extend to individual workers, who remain liable for their personal income 
taxes and the employee share of FICA taxes. 
5 In no event will a return filed after the date on which the IRS first contacts the taxpayer concerning an 
examination of the period to which the return relates be considered as filed on a basis consistent with 
good faith treatment by the taxpayer of an individual as a non-employee. Additionally, section 530 relief is 
not available for any year and for any worker for whom the taxpayer did not file the required returns.
 
--- page 7 ---
7 
 
individual as not being an employee (reporting consistency requirement); (2) the 
taxpayer did not treat the individual or any individual holding a substantially similar 
position as an employee (substantive consistency requirement); and (3) the taxpayer 
had a reasonable basis for not treating the individual as an employee (reasonable basis 
requirement).  A taxpayer will be treated as having a reasonable basis if the taxpayer's 
treatment was in reasonable reliance on any of the following: 
 (a)  judicial precedent, published rulings, technical advice with respect to 
the taxpayer, or a letter ruling to the taxpayer (judicial precedent); 
 (b) a past IRS audit of the taxpayer in which there was no assessment 
attributable to the treatment (for employment tax purposes) of the individuals 
holding substantially similar positions (prior audit); 
 (c) long-standing recognized practice of a significant segment of the 
industry in which that individual was engaged (industry practice); or 
 (d) some other reasonable basis for not treating the individual as an 
employee.  
Section 530 relief applies only to controversies involving the proper classification 
of individuals as employees or non-employees.  Section 530 is not applicable when a 
taxpayer treated an individual as an employee and then paid additional compensation to 
the employee for the same services but failed to characterize the payment as wages.  
This includes situations where the taxpayer contends that the payment does not meet 
the definition of wages because the payment is a lease payment, bonus, 
--- page 8 ---
8 
 
reimbursement, severance payment, dividend, or other comparable characterization, 
but the payment is, in fact, paid solely for the individual’s service as an employee. 
Section 530(a)(1)(A) provides that a taxpayer is entitled to relief if the taxpayer 
“did not treat an individual as an employee for any period” for purposes of employment 
taxes (emphasis added).  Legislative history demonstrates that section 530 applies 
exclusively to taxpayers involved in employment status controversies with the IRS.  The 
legislative history explains that the relief measure was for taxpayers that were “involved 
in employment tax status controversies with the [IRS], and who potentially face large 
assessments, as a result of the [IRS’s] proposed reclassifications of workers” and 
explains that the bill prevents the IRS from reclassifying as employees certain 
individuals whom the taxpayer has previously treated as independent contractors.  S. 
Rep. No. 95-1263, at 210 (1978). 
In determining whether a taxpayer did not “treat” an individual as an employee 
within the meaning of section 530, Rev. Proc. 2025-10, 2025-4 IRB XX, modifying and 
superseding Rev. Proc. 85-18, 1985-1 CB 518, provides a list of guidelines used to 
determine whether there was “treatment” of an individual as an employee for a period 
within the meaning of section 530(a)(1).  Among other actions, with respect to any 
individual, the following indicate “treatment” of the individual as an employee: the 
withholding of income tax or FICA taxes from any payments made; the filing of an 
original or amended employment tax return; the filing or issuance of a Form W-2; and 
the contracting with a third party to perform acts required of employers.   
--- page 9 ---
9 
 
In enacting section 530, Congress looked to the taxpayer’s treatment of the 
individual, not to the characterization of particular payments made to the individual.  If 
an employer treated the individual as an employee, section 530 relief is not applicable 
to a dispute involving characterization of particular payments because the worker is not 
being reclassified from non-employee to employee status.
6  Thus, section 530 does not 
apply to controversies concerning whether a particular type of payment made to an 
employee constitutes “wages” as defined under the FICA, FUTA, or income tax 
withholding provisions, or whether particular services performed by an employee 
constitute “employment,” as defined under the FICA, FUTA, or income tax withholding 
provisions. 
If an employer failed to properly treat an individual as an employee, and the 
employer does not meet the statutory requirements for section 530 relief, the employer 
may be eligible for relief under § 3509 of the Code.  Section 3509(a) allows an employer 
to remit unpaid taxes at reduced rates if an employer fails to deduct and withhold 
income tax or the employee share of FICA tax with respect to any of its employees 
because the employer treated that employee as a non-employee.  Pursuant to § 
3509(c), the reduced rates do not apply to the determination of the employer’s liability 
 
6 In unusual cases, an individual may perform services for a taxpayer that are completely separate and 
distinct from the services giving rise to the employment relationship, and is separately compensated for 
those services.  To be completely separate and distinct, there must be no interrelation either as to duties 
or remuneration in the two capacities.  Compare Rev. Rul. 58-505, 1958-2 CB 728, with Rev. Rul. 2004-
109, 2004-2 CB 958, and Rev. Rul. 2004-110, 2004-2 CB 960.  In these circumstances, the status of the 
individual as an employee or non-employee, and the application of section 530, will be considered 
separately with respect to the distinct relationships under which the separate services are provided . 
--- page 10 ---
10 
 
for income tax withholding or the employee portion of FICA tax if such liability is due to 
the employer’s intentional disregard of the requirement to deduct and withhold such 
taxes. 
The concept of “treatment” of an individual as not being an employee in § 3509 is 
similar to “treatment” in section 530.  The legislative history indicates that § 3509 of the 
Code was intended to provide relief for employers in cases in which a worker treated as 
a non-employee by the employer is reclassified by the IRS as an employee, and to 
deter employers from misclassifying employees to avoid employment taxes.7 
Similar to section 530, if an employer treated an individual as an employee, 
§ 3509 of the Code will not apply since the worker is not being reclassified from non-
employee to employee.8  Thus, § 3509 is not applicable when determining whether 
particular payments made to an employee are “wages” or whether particular services 
performed by an employee are “employment” as defined under the FICA, FUTA, or 
income tax withholding provisions. 
Section 7436 of the Code provides that the Tax Court may review two types of 
employment tax determinations made by the IRS and the proper amount of employment 
tax, penalties, and additions to tax resulting from the determinations.   
 
7 See Staff of Joint Committee on Taxation, 97th Cong., General Explanation of the Revenue Provisions 
of the Tax Equity and Fiscal Responsibility Act of 1982 (JCS-38-82), at 384-86 (Comm. Print 1982); H.R. 
Rep. No. 97-760, at 650-52 (1982) (Conf. Rep.); S. Rep. No. 97-494, Vol. 1, at 370-72 (1982). 
8 As stated in footnote 5, an individual may perform services for a taxpayer that are completely separate 
and distinct from the services giving rise to the employment relationship, and is separately compensated 
for those services.  In these circumstances, the status of the individual as an employee or non- employee, 
and the application of § 3509, will be considered separately with respect to each of the distinct 
relationships under which the separate services are provided. 
--- page 11 ---
11 
 
In order to obtain Tax Court review, the following elements must be present: 
(1) an examination in connection with the audit of any person;  
(2) a determination that – 
(a) one or more individuals performing services for such person are 
employees of such person for purposes of subtitle C, or 
(b) such person is not entitled to relief under section 530(a) with respect to 
such an individual; 
(3) an “actual controversy” involving the determination as part of an examination; 
and 
(4) the filing of an appropriate pleading in the Tax Court. 
See American Airlines Inc. v. Commissioner, 144 T.C. 24, at 32 (2015).  When the first 
three elements are met, the IRS will issue a § 7436 Notice.  A taxpayer will satisfy the 
fourth element by filing a timely petition for review of the § 7436 Notice with the Tax 
Court.  Revenue Procedure 2022-13, 2022-6 IRB 477, superseding Notice 2002-5, 
2002-1 CB 320, provides guidance concerning when and how the IRS will issue a 
§ 7436 Notice that will document the determination necessary to give the taxpayers the 
option to petition for Tax Court review.  The IRS will not issue a § 7436 Notice if the 
taxpayer has agreed to the employment tax liabilities.  Agreement is generally 
accomplished using Form 2504-T “Agreement to Assessment and Collection of 
Additional Employment Tax and Acceptance of Overassessment (Employment Tax 
Adjustments Subject to IRC 7436).”  
HOLDINGS 
--- page 12 ---
12 
 
Holding 1.  Section 530 is applicable to this situation because the TP did not 
treat the individuals as employees, and the IRS is reclassifying the individuals as 
employees.  Whether TP is entitled to section 530 relief depends on whether the TP 
satisfies the substantive consistency, reporting consistency, and reasonable basis 
requirements.  If section 530 does not apply, § 3509 of the Code may be applicable 
because the TP treated the individuals as non-employees and did not deduct and 
withhold federal employment taxes from the weekly fixed amounts and bonus amounts 
that it paid to the individuals, and the IRS is reclassifying the individuals as employees.  
Whether TP is entitled to § 3509 reduced rates depends on whether it meets the 
statutory requirements in § 3509.  The IRS will issue TP a § 7436 Notice at the 
conclusion of the audit or after Appeals consideration if no agreement is reached. A  
§ 7436 Notice will be issued because (1) there was an examination in connection with 
an audit, (2) there were determinations that (a) the individuals were employees of TP, 
and (b) TP was not entitled to relief under section 530 with respect to these individuals
9, 
and (3) the IRS and TP disagree on the employment status of the workers and whether 
the statutory requirements for section 530 relief have been met (there is an actual 
controversy involving the determination as part of the audit).  
Holding 2.  Section 530 is not applicable to this situation because the IRS is not 
reclassifying the individuals as employees.  TP treated the individuals as employees for 
the services they performed and paid additional wages in the form of bonuses for the 
 
9 If the IRS were to make only one of these determinations, a § 7436 Notice would still be issued.  
--- page 13 ---
13 
 
same services; there is no controversy over whether the individuals are employees or 
independent contractors with respect to their services.10  The reduced rates under 
§ 3509 of the Code are not applicable for the same reason.  The IRS will issue TP a 
§ 7436 Notice at the conclusion of the audit or after Appeals consideration if no 
agreement is reached. A  § 7436 Notice will be issued because (1) there was an 
examination in connection with an audit, (2) a determination was made that TP was not 
entitled to relief under section 530 with respect to the bonuses paid to the individuals, 
and (3) the IRS and TP disagree on whether the statutory requirements for section 530 
relief have been met (there is an actual controversy involving the determination as part 
of the audit).   
Holding 3.  Section 530 and § 3509 of the Code are not applicable to this 
situation for the same reasons stated in Holding 2.  The IRS will issue TP a § 7436 
Notice at the conclusion of the audit or after Appeals consideration if no agreement is 
reached. A  § 7436 Notice will be issued because (1) there was an examination in 
connection with an audit, (2) a determination was made that TP was not entitled to relief 
under section 530 with respect to the bonuses paid to the individuals, and (3) the IRS 
and TP disagree on whether the statutory requirements for section 530 relief have been 
met (there is an actual controversy involving the determination as part of the audit).  
 
10 Compare SECC Corp. v. Commissioner, 142 T.C. 225, 235 (2014) (dispute over “whether petitioner's 
workers can serve in a dual capacity”). 